% What is Anarcho-Primitivism?
% Anonymous
% 2005

## I. Introduction

Anarcho-primitivists comprise a subculture and political movement that,
generally, advocates hunting and gathering as the ideal human subsistence
method (from the point of view of sustainable resource use) and the band as
the ideal human social structure (for its features of egalitarianism). While
the goal may seem improbable, a primitivist would contend that more modest
goals are either undesirable or unachievable within the system. The past
10,000 years have after all been largely a history of “solutions” to the
problems of an agricultural society. This critique of “civilization”
inherently rejects less radical ideals and claims to go uniquely to the heart
of all social discontent. It is multi-faceted, drawing on several traditions
of thought. These include the nineteenth century social speculators,
anthropology of hunter-gatherers, situationism, anarchism, radical (deep)
ecology, and anti-technological philosophy. The potential problem of
implementation is largely solved by a growing consensus that an end to
“economic growth” is fast approaching, making revolutionary change inevitable.
The direction of that change is the focus of anarcho-primitivist interest.

Anarcho-primitivism is subtly influencing society in several ways. The
Unabomber’s “manifesto” enunciated many of the central tenets of
anarcho-primitivism (e.g. rejection of liberalism and industrialism).
Primitivists were among the protesters participating in window-smashing,
spray-painting, and other vandalism at the Seattle WTO protests in December
1999. They are probably among those elusive “eco-terrorists” who carry out
property destruction in the name of the Earth Liberation Front. The popular
novel Fight Club (1996), which became a feature film, portrayed a group of
alienated young men who reject consumerist culture and attempt to bring it to
an end through massive sabotage. While anarcho-primitivism may not seem worthy
of much thought or attention because it falls far outside the mainstream of
political discourse, it ought not to be dismissed. It merits substantial
attention solely on the basis of its harmonious integration of several
historically disparate lines of thought.

## II. Aims

The prefix “anarcho” signifies the anarchist rejection of the state in favor
of small-scale political structures. Additionally, as primitivist icon John
Zerzan (2002:67–68) explains, “I would say Anarchism is the attempt to
eradicate all forms of domination.” So a key distinction must be made between
anarcho-primitivists and anarchists generally because, “[f]or example, some
Anarchists don’t see the technological imperative as a category of
domination.”

In the most general terms, they reject “civilization” in favor of “wildness.”
More specifically, they call for the abandonment or destruction of industrial
(and possibly agricultural) technology in favor of subsistence that is not
based on the industrial “forces of production” — hence, the adoption of the
“primitive” label. This means that primitivists reject even forms of
production based on collective management and ownership because any production
exceeding immediate subsistence needs is seen as incompatible with long-term
sustainability. Derrick Jensen (2000:143) explains:

> “Make no mistake, our economic system can do no other than destroy
> everything it encounters. That’s what happens when you convert living beings
> to cash. That conversion, from living trees to lumber, schools of cod to
> fish sticks, and onward to numbers on a ledger, is the central process of
> our economic system.”

## III. Influences and Precedents

a.  Anarcho-primitivism’s internal coherence lies in its complementary and
    self-reinforcing synthesis of several previous modes of thought. The
    oldest and most pervasive of these is the romantic idea of the noble
    savage. This idea, popularized in the eighteenth century by Rousseau
    (2001), has persisted ever since (recall the Iron Eyes Cody anti-litter
    advertising campaign). This romanticism was adopted by the nineteenth
    century transcendentalists like Emerson, Thoreau, and Margaret Fuller
    (Pearce 146–150). However, these early radical thinkers, while admiring of
    the “primitives” and favoring social change, did not seek to emulate their
    societies: “The fact is,” Thoreau wrote, “the history of the white man is
    a history of improvement, that of the red man a history of fixed habits of
    stagnation.” (Pearce 1965:149). The white man’s “history of improvement”
    was the focus of another group of speculators, including Comte, Tylor,
    Powell, Morgan, and Spencer, who advocated unilineal cultural evolution
    (Bettinger 1991:1–29). The most prominent of these was Morgan who outlined
    the progression from savagery to barbarism to civilization. These stages
    were defined by increasing technological progress (originating with
    stone-age hunter-gatherers) resulting in a corresponding decrease in
    reliance on nature and the increasing opportunity for managerial and
    artistic pursuits (Bettinger 1991:4), but only for an elite class.
    Although Morgan’s categories of society roughly correspond to some of
    those still in use today, the idea of unilineal evolution is of no more
    than historical interest to anthropologists today, who no longer endorse
    sweeping generalizations without significant supporting evidence.

b.  It was not until the 1960s that the negative stereotype of “savagery” was
    challenged. In 1966, the first international conference on hunting and
    gathering societies (entitled “Man the Hunter”) was held in Chicago
    (Bettinger 1991:48). The significance of this conference was to overturn
    the longstanding assumption that hunter-gatherers’ lives were “nasty,
    brutish and short,” in the enduring words of Thomas Hobbes. Marshall
    Sahlins famously made the case in his paper, “Notes on the Original
    Affluent Society,” which consolidated brand new ethnographic research from
    Africa and Australia. He concluded that hunter-gatherers (of the most
    mobile sort) could be characterized as affluent on the basis that their
    few and simple wants were easily met. He called this economy the “Zen way”
    (1972:29). Although significant problems with his source data are
    recognized now, his essay is still commonly assigned in introductory
    anthropology courses because of a lingering sense that he “had a point”
    (Bird-David 1992:26). Since Man the Hunter, there has been no shift in the
    scholarly literature back toward the negative stereotypes of
    hunter-gatherers. (A shift away from stereotypes in general is an obvious
    trend, however.) Richard Lee, a co-organizer of the 1966 conference, still
    publishes work propounding the study of the “primitive communism”
    phenomenon (Lee 1995). Participants in this revolution of hunter-gatherer
    studies certainly were and are aware of the romantic stereotype of the
    noble savage, and, if only unconsciously, they had brought it up-to-date
    with modern scholarship, giving it significant credibility. This
    primitivist trend attracted many to the study of hunter gatherers, and
    certainly formed a foundation for the appearance of anarcho-primitivism in
    the ensuing decades.

c.  In a novel critique of modern society that we would now recognize as
    postmodernism, Guy Debord expressed in The Society of the Spectacle (1995)
    the vacuity of life within industrial society in terms of “the spectacle”
    — his term for symbolic representation run amok. In Thesis 1 he says, “All
    that once was directly lived has become mere representation.” (1995:12).
    Debord was part of a revolutionary French art movement of the 1960s,
    Situationism, which rejected the substitution of representation for direct
    experience. Like previous art movements had done, Situationsists sought to
    bridge the divide between art and everyday life. Primitivist Kevin Tucker
    (2003)  makes clear that, in the decades since Debord presented his
    critique, the dominance of his “spectacle” has grown exponentially with
    the development of audio-video recording technology and the internet as
    mediums of communication (“medium” is a key word here, suggesting
    “mediate”) that replaces the direct interaction of individuals. As in the
    early primitivism of the Transcendentalists, Debord’s situationism implied
    a desire for social change, a desire that he makes explicit in a preface
    to a recent edition (1995:10). The above quotation of Thesis 1 also
    illustrates Debord’s primitivism. In lamenting the loss of a perceived
    past in which direct experience was universal, he paved the way for
    anarcho-primitivism, which would paint a clearer picture of that implicit
    alternative. Debord and his contemporaries were aware of political
    movements that had historically exhibited similar critical attitudes to
    social and political norms (“Situationism” 2002). Among these was
    anarchism.

d.  Anarchism, also called libertarian socialism, has a long and complicated
    history beginning in Europe approximately 200 years ago “in the climate of
    reason” that simultaneously gave rise to libertarian and authoritarian
    socialism (Bose 1967:77,379). At the end of the nineteenth century, it was
    taking hold in the US and Europe among organized laborers. It was at this
    time that the stereotype of the bomb-throwing anarchist was born, fueled
    by events such as the Haymarket Affair (Bose 1967:253,392). However this
    stereotype does injustice to the idealistic motives of anarchists as
    explicated by its numerous philosophical proponents. The chaos they are so
    frequently accused of desiring is arguably the antithesis of their true
    motives: the widespread (socially accepted and internalized) disorder of
    war, oppression, greed, hunger, depression that stalks hierarchical
    societies is the object of anarchists’ assault. As Howard Zinn (1997:644)
    explains,

    > It is these conditions that anarchists have wanted to end: to bring a
    > kind of order to the world for the first time. We have never listened to
    > them carefully, except through the hearing aids supplied by the
    > guardians of disorder — the national government leaders, whether
    > capitalist or socialist.

    The ultimate aim of anarchists is hardly different than that of other
    idealists throughout history. But anarchists’ optimism — their faith in
    the ability of human beings to voluntarily cooperate with each other —
    sets them clearly apart from all the others, who unfailingly require some
    authoritarian class for the maintenance of “order.”

    It was perhaps a lapse in this long-standing faith, stemming from the lost
    optimism of the 1960s, that led some anarchists in search of a historical
    basis for their convictions — a search that led back to the origins of the
    first states — that is, to the beginning of “civilization” itself. These
    primitivist themes began to appear in anarchist publications in the 1980s,
    and they explicitly referenced the 1960s anthropology of hunter-gatherers
    (e.g. Sahlins 1972); the egalitarian band structure seemed to exemplify
    the anarchist solution to social disorder. The environmental movement also
    flourished into the 1970s, and this is reflected in the anarchist-leaning
    fiction of Edward Abbey.

e.  Abbey’s 1975 novel, *The Monkey Wrench Gang* (1976), centered on a small
    group of radical, mostly young individuals dedicated to sabotaging the
    infrastructure that allowed for the taming of the “wilderness” of the
    American west. They are sympathetically portrayed as the underdogs in a
    country where political power is held by no-good despoilers of nature. The
    uncompromising sentiment for “eco-defense” (a novel concept itself)
    expressed by Abbey reflected a radical environmental ethic that was
    totally new and would become known as “deep ecology.” This ethic is
    summed-up well by its recognized founder, Arne Næss: “The flourishing of
    human and non-human life on Earth has intrinsic value. The value of
    non-human life forms is independent of the usefulness these may have for
    narrow human purposes.” (1999) It was in this context of Abbey’s advocacy
    of “monkey wrenching” and Næss’s eco-philosophy that the name “Earth
    First!” was given in 1989 to a new movement dedicated to defending the
    natural world by any means necessary (“About Earth First!” n.d.; “Earth
    First” 2005).

Derrick Jensen (2000:188) expresses “the central question” that environmental
activists face: “What are sane and appropriate responses to insanely
destructive behavior?” He continues, “So often environmentalists…are capable
of plainly describing the problems…, yet when faced with the emotionally
daunting task of fashioning a response…, we generally suffer a failure of
nerve and imagination.” Earth First! reflected the first attempt to overcome
this failure of nerve, but the challenge drove others to take more extreme
measures. The large-scale property destruction (glorified in Edward Abbey’s
novels) of the Earth Liberation Front (ELF) was one response to the
ineffective “reformist” measures taken by many activists. The first actions
claimed by the ELF occurred during the 1990s in the UK and US. Examples
include the 1998 arson of the Vail Mountain ski resort, the 2003 arson of a
San Diego condominium construction site, and multiple examples of vandalism at
car dealerships, particularly of sport utility vehicles (“Earth Liberation
Front” 2005).

The radical environmental movement was compatible with primitivist ideas, as
the popular portrayal of Indians as ecologists demonstrates. “Primitive”
people, especially mobile hunter-gatherers, are directly dependent on the land
for their subsistence and, presumably, have a more “ecocentric” worldview than
is possible in modern industrial society. There has been some dispute over
this point in recent years from scholars who seem “intent on demonstrating
that it is ‘human nature’ to be environmentally destructive” (Hunn 2002).
Eugene Hunn attempts to put the debate into perspective concluding, “by the
excellent condition of the continent when the first Europeans arrived,” that
Native Americans had done something right. He continues,

> “That the continent was not ‘pristine wilderness’ is undeniable, since it
> had long been home to millions of Indian peoples. That Indian peoples had
> cared well for this land, had conserved its biodiversity, is also
> undeniable. To dispute the reality of ‘The Ecological Indian’…is to blind us
> to the damage done since, in the name of progress and of profit.”

Thus, environmental problems came to be seen as a symptom of the far larger
problem of “civilization,” which has demonstrated unconcern for any limits to
“growth” to the detriment of the natural world. One individual responding to
some of the same concerns with a more anti-technological focus was Theodore
Kaczynski, widely known as “the Unabomber.”

f.  A 34,000-word paper entitled “Industrial Society and Its Future” was
    published in September 1995 by the *Washington Post*. The Post was
    complying with an anonymous offer from the “Unabomber” to stop his 17-year
    bombing campaign in exchange for the publication of his revolutionary
    treatise. Sixteen mailed bombs were sent by Kaczynski, resulting in the
    deaths of three and injuring 23 more (Goldberg 1996). The “manifesto,” as
    the media called it, decries the ever-increasing dominance of technology
    within modern society. It calls for a revolution, not against political
    structures, but against “the economic and technological basis of the
    present society” (Kaczynski 2003:3). This tendency to aggressively
    challenge technological innovation can be traced back to early
    eighteenth-century England when advances in textile manufacturing
    technology threatened to make obsolete centuries of tradition. These
    detractors of technology, popularly called Luddites, from 1811 to 1812
    sabotaged this new machinery creating an uproar in English society (Sale
    1995a). Their name derives from the mythological figure, Ned Ludd, whose
    name served as a pseudonym in their letters of threat of and explanation
    for their vandalism (Sale 1995a:77–78).

Modern philosophers including Jacques Ellul, Lewis Mumford, and Chellis
Glendinning — so-called neo-Luddites (Sale 1995a:237–240) — continue to
promote the skepticism toward “progress” that has surely existed as long as
technological innovation itself. The difference between neo-Luddites and their
predecessors is that, in the nineteenth century, new technologies were only a
social threat, whereas today technology threatens the biological systems that
form the basis of human existence (Sale 1995a:266–267). Kaczynski’s text is
very clearly informed by neo-Luddite thought, although he does not cite the
influence of any previous thinkers within it (Sale 1995b:305). Elsewhere he
has said, “Technology, above all else, is responsible for the current
condition of the world and will control its future development.” The ideology
of the Luddites and their modern counterparts provides a crucial pillar of
anarcho-primitivism.

g.  A final pillar supporting the primitivist ethos demonstrates the
    unsustainability of industrial society. This body of work refutes those
    arguments that claim science will provide the solutions necessary to
    sustain current First World living standards in the face of massive
    resource degradation and depletion. It also provides anarcho-primitivists
    a safe, simple answer to the challenge, “How are you going to get there?”
    The 1972 book, *Limits to Growth* (LTG), was the first systematic
    assessment of the sustainability of modern society. More than a decade of
    environmentalism still had not popularly integrated ubiquitous
    environmental problems into a coherent message for public consumption.
    Earlier works like Erlich’s *The Population Bomb* and Carson’s *Silent
    Spring* had focused on specific bite-sized issues. LTG offered a
    satisfying, yet disturbing complete picture. It was the product of a
    research project commissioned by the Club of Rome, an international,
    informal group of “businessmen, statesmen, and scientists” (Meadows, et.
    al. 2004:ix) who wanted an assessment of the sustainability of the overall
    course of human society. The final report predicted that unless widespread
    measures were taken to reduce consumption and pollution sufficiently
    early, human society would overshoot global carrying capacity and
    ultimately face a collapse, defined as “an uncontrolled decline in both
    population and human welfare” (Meadows, et. al. 2004:xi). The research
    group reached this conclusion through the use of a computer model which
    was able to factor in multiple variables and the interaction between them.
    LTG was the first attempt to present the environmental crisis as a whole
    and show that it required a systematic response (Kassiola 1990:17).

Resource shortages have become a serious concern in recent years among
limits-to-growth theorists. By far, the most popular and far-reaching of the
theories of resource depletion concerns petroleum. “Peak oil” refers to the
point at which total oil extraction (in a particular oil-field, a region, or
the planet) reaches its highest point along the slope of a bell curve. From
that moment on, supply begins to drop while demand persists. This phenomenon
has been observed for decades, but the global economy has been able to
sufficiently redistribute oil to regions where the supply has long been
exhausted (e.g. Texas). The consequences of the global peak of oil extraction
are only recently being considered: when global supply is unable to meet
global demand, oil’s market value will begin rising ever-faster. Anything and
everything that depends on oil (try imagining some aspect of out society that
does not) will become increasingly expensive, and eventually industrial
society will grind to a halt. It must be added, few if any of the scholars who
promote limits-to-growth critiques are excited about the end of “civilization”
they foresee (most hope to avert it), but, for an anarcho-primitivist, their
scenarios provide a near-panacea.

The seven influences outlined above are by no means universally recognized
among all anarcho-primitivists, but they are clearly visible throughout the
available “anti-civilization” literature. The key writers, including John
Zerzan, Derrick Jensen, and Daniel Quinn, all come from different backgrounds
— the labor movement, the environmental movement, or entirely non-political —
but they each synthesize elements of the above influences and add their own
unique contributions.

## IV. Synthesis

John Zerzan (1994,2002) adds the most academic voice to the chorus. While his
writing style is the least accessible, his critique is by far the deepest. He
seeks the root of all domination, and this path leads him deeper into
prehistory than even the origins of agriculture. Art, language, number, time,
and even symbolic thought have been subjects of Zerzan’s interrogation. For
him, each of those serves to mediate humans from the direct experience of the
world that Guy Debord elegized. Daniel Quinn’s *Ishmael* (1995), is
undoubtedly the most widely read book questioning the basis of civilization.
It is a novel that revolves around a Socratic-style dialogue in which the
reader learns how civilization came to be and what humanity has forgotten as a
result. Derrick Jensen provides a uniquely psychological analysis of modern
civilization, drawing on the work of R. D. Laing and Erich Fromm. He uses his
own experience of child abuse to show how the same types of relationships are
manifested on a larger scale throughout society (2000). He also assesses the
psychology of hate groups in terms of its relationship the dominant culture
(2002).

All of these individuals agree that civilization was a mistake that has had
disastrous consequences for human and non-human life, and it will continue to
wreak havoc until people decide to stop it or until it collapses under it own
weight. After one of these events occurs, the planet will finally be able to
begin recovering from 10,000 years of human domestication.

> “Picture yourself planting radishes and seed potatoes on the fifteenth green
> of a forgotten golf course. You’ll hunt elk through the damp canyon forests
> around the ruins of Rockefeller Center, and dig clams next to the skeleton
> of the Space Needle leaning at a forty-five degree angle. We’ll paint the
> skyscrapers with huge totem faces and goblin tikis, and every evening what’s
> left of mankind will retreat to empty zoos and lock itself in cages as
> protection against the bears and big cats and wolves that pace and watch us
> from outside the cage bars at night….
>
> [Y]ou’ll wear leather clothes that will last you the rest of your life, and
> you’ll climb the wrist-thick kudzu vines that wrap the Sears Tower…. [T]he
> air will be so clean you’ll see tiny figures pounding corn and laying strips
> of venison to dry in the empty car pool lane of an abandoned superhighway
> stretching eight-lanes-wide and August-hot for a thousand miles.” (Palaniuk
> 1996:124–125)

The above quotation from the popular novel *Fight Club* is a vivid description
(some might say caricature) of a world in which industrial civilization has
been survived by the kinds of small-scale societies to which
anarcho-primitivists aspire. There are two modes of thought on how people can
affect this outcome. The first, advocated by Daniel Quinn (2000), is that it
can only be accomplished through the dissemination of a new “vision” through
society, which will inevitably result in the radical transformation of
civilization necessary to end the destruction of the natural world. Quinn
feels that without first “changing minds” all other efforts will be fruitless.
However, this strategy has been criticized for a lack of urgency. Derrick
Jensen (2000:182) conveys this urgency well:

> “Many perceive the pain of denuded forests and extirpated salmon directly in
> their bodies: part of their personal identities includes their habitat —
> their human and nonhuman surroundings. Thus they are not working to save
> something out there, but responding in defense of their own lives. This is
> not dissimilar to the protection of one’s family: why does a mother grizzly
> bear charge a train to protect her cubs, and why does a mother human
> fiercely fight to defend her own?”

The more common response among primitivists reflects this urgency and calls
for direct action that will bring an end to the destruction wrought by
industrial technology as quickly as possible.

A legitimate objection to destruction of the infrastructure of industrial
society is that it would inevitably lead to the deaths of millions. Aside from
the high probability that such a scenario will eventually occur, if current
trends continue, without any help from saboteurs (Meadows, et. al. 2004) and
that the sooner that catastrophe occurs the less “disastrous the results…will
be” (Kaczynski 2003:3), an anarcho-primitivist would argue that such
objections exhibit naïveté about the reality of technological progress.

> “You can’t get rid of the ‘bad’ parts of technology and retain only the
> ‘good’ parts. Take modern medicine, for example. Progress in medical science
> depends on progress in chemistry, physics, biology, computer science and
> other fields. Advanced medical treatments require expensive, high-tech
> equipment that can be made available only by a technologically progressive,
> economically rich society. Clearly you can’t have much progress in medicine
> without the whole technological system and everything that goes with it.”
> (Kaczynski 2003:121)

The increasing incidence of cancer is probably the most ironic consequence of
this “progress.” In terms of the human health that modern medicine ostensibly
improves, the cancer epidemic provides a striking wake-up call to advocates of
medical technology. It generally agreed that cancer is a disease caused
primarily by the lifestyle of Western Civilization (Moss n.d.; Ransom 2002).
All the same, life expectancy has increased in the last 100 years (“Life
Expectancy” n.d.; Stobbe 2005). This begs the question of which is more
important, quantity or quality of life.

The consequences of modern technology are certainly far greater for nonhumans,
as they are not its intended beneficiaries. The present global rate of
extinction is estimated between 100 and 1000 times the (normal) background
rate (Levin and Levin 2002). As a result of large-scale logging, less than two
percent of U.S. forests were more than 200 years old in 1997 (“U.S.
Forestland” n.d.). Every introductory environmental science textbook describes
in detail the seemingly endless atrocities perpetrated against the natural
world. Fisheries are being harvested at rates far in excess of the maxim
sustainable yield. The same chemicals responsible for the human cancer
epidemic transform diverse productive land and water habitats into barren
waste dumps.

Anarcho-primitivism seeks a return to a wild life free from the culture that
seems to be doing its best to destroy the planet, a life that humanity
successfully realized for nearly all of our time on this planet (Rosman and
Rubel 2004:181). What this entails in the modern context is a small scale
society that is independent from the global industrial economy, but said
society would also not be restricted by the modern constraints of property and
imaginary borders. It would be self-sufficient, subsisting successfully on the
local land as well as any scraps which civilization (or what is left of it)
provides. It would lack the desire to control or subdue the life forms upon
which it depended. But most importantly, such a community would have a
visceral sense of and relationship to a physical place.

## V. Prospects

Much of the anarcho-primitivist community is restricted to the pages of
anarchist magazines and websites. This is community in a very loose, virtual
sense, but in the modern context this form of “community” is almost surely a
prerequisite of any new zeitgeist. These are real individuals writing,
reading, and thinking about anarcho-primitivism across the world, and their
common interest connects them. This “community” is only significant insofar as
it has the potential to lead to face-to-face interaction, however.

There are some signs of actual emerging communities which advocate and apply
(to an extent) the principles of an anarcho-primitivist philosophy. The first
large-scale secular movement that exhibited some “primitivist” themes was the
outbreak of communes during the late 1960s (Houriet 1971). The hippie
subculture idolized the Native American cultures of the southwest like the
Pueblo, Hopi, and Zuni (1971:198). Synonymously called the “back to the land”
movement, these intentional communities emphasized that the land was true
basis for the economy (1971:153, 181). The hippies advanced few of the
philosophical and none of the empirical arguments that have become available
in the last 35 years as justification for a non-civilized life, and their
communities have all but disintegrated. In the early 1980s, the various
threads of primitivism began to cohere into the independent worldview outlined
above.

Today there are a few groups of people who actively seek out community that
approximates (as closely as is feasible) an anarcho-primitivist alternative.
Most loosely connected to anarcho-primitivism are so-called primitive skills
gatherings, at which attendees camp in an undeveloped area and learn a few
skills of self-sufficient survival including bow and arrow making, friction
fire-starting, edible wild plant identification, animal tracking, and shelter
construction (“Primitive Skills” n.d.). For some, the interest in these
meetings may be more hobby-oriented than ideological, but the skills they
teach would be of definite use where the necessities of life are not provided
by a global industrial economy.

Wildroots is the name of a self-described “radical homestead” in North
Carolina. One resident participated in a brief interview (Anon. 2005)
providing the following information. It began with only two individuals and
the population has since doubled. Two are from the “upper middle class,” one
from the “middle class, and the other from the “working class.” Visitors are
welcome and typically stay for a few weeks in the spring and summer. “There
aren’t really rules, except that if anyone new wanted to live there long-term
and build a dwelling, the four of us would all have to agree on that.” There
are also no “economic limits to ‘membership’.” The group lives on 30-acres of
lush land which is owned outright. All of the members have spent time at
larger intentional communities, and one member has lived at one.

“We are pretty heavily influenced by many of the same ideas even if we haven’t
all read the same books. Many of us are into Chellis Glendinning and Derrick
Jensen.” Clearly, Wildroots is philosophically rooted in anarcho-primitivism.
The resident said that Wildroots was not the only attempt at a primitive
community and cited two examples in Washington state (“the Institute for
Applied Piracy and the Feral Farm”).

It should be clear, by now, that there is a reasonably solid canon of
anarcho-primitivist philosophy available, which provides the seeds for what
could potentially blossom into a movement. Several periodicals (*Green
Anarchy*, *Species Traitor*, *Green Anarchist*, *Fifth Estate*, *Live Wild or
Die*, *The Final Days*, *Green Journal*, *Disorderly Conduct*, *Cracks in the
Empire*, *Do or Die*, and *Quick!*) are dedicated to anarcho-primitivist
theory, and the most widely circulated American anarchist magazine, *Anarchy:
A Journal of Desire Armed*, frequently features primitivist viewpoints (Zerzan
2002:3). The Federal Bureau of Investigation apparently sees the potential of
a radical environmental movement, since it has deemed eco-terrorism the number
one domestic terrorist threat. The small communities currently in existence
may represent the budding of this movement or they may not. In either case,
the arguments in favor of anarcho-primitivism should be evaluated openly by
mainstream society because, if its claims are valid, their implications are
immediate and uncommonly far-reaching.

## Works Cited

-   Abbey, Edward. (1976) *The Monkey Wrench Gang*. New York: Avon.

-   About Earth First! (n.d.) Retrieved November 17, 2005, from Earth First!
    Worldwide:
    [http://www.earthfirst.org/about.htm](http://www.earthfirst.org/about.htm)

-   Anonymous. (2005, Nov 26). “Re: Interview.” Personal email to the author.

-   Bettinger, Robert L. (1991). *Hunter-Gatherers: Archaeological and
    Evolutionary Theory*. New York: Plenum.

-   Bose, Atindranath. (1967). *A History of Anarchism*. Calcutta: World.

-   Debord, Guy. (1995). *The Society of the Spectacle*. New York: Zone.
    (Original 1967)

-   Earth First! (2005, November 15). Wikipedia, The Free Encyclopedia.
    Retrieved November 17, 2005, from
    [http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Earth\_First!](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Earth_First!)

-   Earth Liberation Front (2005, November 17, 18:24). Wikipedia, The Free
    Encyclopedia. Retrieved November 17, 2005, from
    [http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Earth\_Liberation\_Front](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Earth_Liberation_Front)

-   Goldberg, Carey. (1996, September 21). “Diaries Disclosed In Unabom
    Hearing,” *The New York Times*, Saturday, Late Edition — Final, Section 1;
    Page 1; Column 5

-   Houriet, Robert. (1971). *Getting Back Together*. New York: Coward, McCann
    & Geoghegan.

-   Hunn, Eugene S. “In Defense of ‘The Ecological Indian.’” Paper presented
    at the Ninth International Conference on Hunting and Gathering Societies,
    Edinburgh, Scotland, September 9, 2002. Retrieved September 6, 2004 from
    [http://www.abdn.ac.uk/chags9/1hunn.htm](http://www.abdn.ac.uk/chags9/1hunn.htm)

-   Jensen, Derrick. (2000). *A Language Older Than Words*. New York: Context.

-   Jensen, Derrick. (2002). *The Culture of Make Believe*. New York: Context.

-   Kaczynski, Theodore. (2003). *Industrial Society and Its Future*.
    Retrieved December 4, 2005, from CrimethInc X.tk:
    [http://www1.shellkonto.se/nilswarm/crimethinc/request.php?5](http://www1.shellkonto.se/nilswarm/crimethinc/request.php?5)

-   Kassiola, Joel Jay. (1990) *The Death of Industrial Civilization: The
    Limits to Economic Growth and the Repoliticization of Advanced Industrial
    Society*. Albany, New York: State U of New York Press.

-   Lee, Richard B. (1995). “Reflections on Primitive Communism.” 252–268. *In
    Hunters and Gatherers 1: History, Evolution and Social Change*. Ed. Tim
    Ingold, David Riches, James Woodburn. Washington: Berg.

-   “Life Expectancy by Age”, 1850 — 2003. Infoplease. Retrieved December 7,
    2005, from
    [http://www.infoplease.com/ipa/A0005140.html](http://www.infoplease.com/ipa/A0005140.html)

-   Levin, Phillip S., and Donald A. Levin. (2002, Jan-Feb). “The Real
    BioDiversity Crisis.” *American Scientist*, 90, 1, 6–8.

-   Meadows, Donella H., Jorgen Randers, and Dennis Meadows. (2004). *Limits
    to Growth: The 30-Year Update*. White River Junction, Vermont: Chelsea
    Green.

-   Moss, Ralph W., PhD. “Cancer: A Disease of Civilization?” Retrieved
    December 7, 2005, from *New Age Journal*:
    [http://www.newagejournal.com/moss.shtml](http://www.newagejournal.com/moss.shtml)

-   Næss, Arne. (1999). *The Deep Ecology Platform*. (Original 1989).
    Retrieved November 17, 2005, from Nancho Consults: Arne Naess:
    [http://www.nancho.net/advisors/anaes.html](http://www.nancho.net/advisors/anaes.html)

-   Palahniuk, Chuck. (1996). *Fight Club*. New York: W. W. Norton & Company.

-   Pearce, Roy Harvey. (1965). *The Savages of America: A Study of the Indian
    and the Idea of Civilization*. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins. (Original 1953).

-   “Primitive Skills Gatherings”. Retrieved December 7, 2005, from
    Traditional Tanners:
    [http://www.braintan.com/resources/gatherings.html](http://www.braintan.com/resources/gatherings.html)

-   Quinn, Daniel. (1995). *Ishmael*. New York: Bantam.

-   Quinn, Daniel. (2000). *A Path of Hope for the Future*. Retrieved December
    6, 2005, from Ishmael Community:
    [http://www.ishmael.org/Education/Writings/houston\_youth.shtml](http://www.ishmael.org/Education/Writings/houston_youth.shtml)

-   Ransom, Steven. (2002). “Death by Doctoring, Part 2 of 2.” Retrieved
    December 7, 2005, from Nexus:
    [http://www.nexusmagazine.com/articles/doctoring2.html](http://www.nexusmagazine.com/articles/doctoring2.html)

-   Rosman, Abraham, and Paula G. Rubel. (2004) *The Tapestry of Culture: an
    introduction to cultural anthropology*. New York: McGraw-Hill.

-   Rousseau, Jean Jacques. (2001). *On the Inequality among Mankind*. Vol.
    XXXIV, Part 3. The Harvard Classics. (Original 1754). Retrieved November
    13, 2005, from Bartleby.com:
    [http://www.bartleby.com/34/3](http://www.bartleby.com/34/3)

-   Sahlins, Marshall. (1972). “The Original Affluent Society.” 1–39. In
    *Stone Age Economics*. Hawthorne, New York: Aldine de Gruyter.

-   Sale, Kirkpatrick. (1995a). *Rebels against the future: the Luddites and
    their war on the Industrial Revolution: lessons for the computer age*. New
    York: Addison-Wesley.

-   Sale, Kirkpatrick . (1995b, September 25). “Unabomber’s Secret Treatise:
    Is There Method In His Madness?” *The Nation*, 261, 9, 305–311.

-   “Situationism”. (2002). The Art Industri Group. Retrieved November 15,
    2005, from Art Movements Directory:
    [http://www.artmovements.co.uk/](http://www.artmovements.co.uk/)

-   Stobbe, Mike (2005, Dec 8). “U.S. Life Expectancy Hits All-Time High.”
    Retrieved December 8, 2005, from Yahoo! News:
    [http://news.yahoo.com/s/ap/oldest\_boomers;*ylt=AhXDqCfognrWZBxv8WBYHvqs0NUE;*ylu=X3oDMTA2Z2szazkxBHNlYwN0bQ](http://news.yahoo.com/s/ap/oldest_boomers;_ylt=AhXDqCfognrWZBxv8WBYHvqs0NUE;_ylu=X3oDMTA2Z2szazkxBHNlYwN0bQ)

-   Tucker, Kevin. (2003, Spring). “The Spectacle of the Symbolic.” *Species
    Traitor: An Insurrectionary Anarcho-Primitivist Journal*, 3, 15–21.

-   U.S. Forestland by Age Class. Retrieved December 7, 2005, from Endgame
    Research Services:
    [http://www.endgame.org/gtt-oldgrowth-us.htm](http://www.endgame.org/gtt-oldgrowth-us.htm)

-   Zerzan, John. (1994). *Future Primitive and Other Essays*. Brooklyn:
    Autonomedia.

-   Zerzan, John. (2002, Spring). “It’s All Coming Down!” In *Green Anarchy*,
    8, 3–3.

-   Zerzan, John. (2002). Running on Emptiness: *The Pathology of
    Civilisation*. Los Angeles: Feral House.

-   Zinn, Howard. (1997). “Anarchism.” 644–655. In *The Zinn Reader: Writings
    on disobedience and democracy*. New York: Seven Stories.
