% Anarchism: Ethics and Meta-Ethics
% Benjamin Franks
% 2008

## Introduction[^1]

There is a joke, told by anarchists against themselves, which goes something
like this:

> Two […] anarchists are making Molotov cocktails. One says to the other, “So
> who will we throw these at then?” The other replies “What are you, some kind
> of fucking intellectual?!?”[^2]

Whatever the merits of the ‘joke’, it illustrates is one of the central themes
of the paper; the contentious place of ethics in anarchism. Popular and
academic conceptions of anarchism regard it as moronic, irrational and
violent.[^3] An alternative reading of the joke might suggest that anarchism
contains the belief that humans, or at least anarchists, are instinctively
good and thus no rational justification is required for an example of
pre-rational, instinctive rebellion. This is a position that is strongly, but
questionably, associated with Michael Bakunin and Peter Kropotkin.[^4] This
paper will demonstrate that these popular conceptions of anarchism, which also
appear in academic texts, are inaccurate or extremely partial. In doing so it
will survey the many different approaches to ethics that appear in anarchist
texts, identifying the distinctive forms of meta- and normative ethics. The
latter prescriptive codes range from deontology and utilitarianism to a
prefigurative moral theory close to a practice-based neo-Aristotelianism. The
various meta-ethical perspectives cover amoralism and subjectivism as well as
the universalism of naturalist and realist ethics (that there are objective
moral facts, which humans can access and there are obligations to meet these
objective standards).[^5]

Rather than dismissing moral considerations, anarchist discourse uses and
evaluates ethical norms and standards in judging between rival actions. Some
anarchists use largely rights-based deontological approaches, others have
proposed ends-based consequentialist criteria, others apply terms redolent of
virtue theory (both in its social and individual forms) by reference to
descriptions such as ‘bravery’, ‘integrity’[^6] and the identification of
whether the speaker embodies the moral principles which she espouses
(*ethos*).[^7]

As well as outlining the various distinctive ethical and meta-ethical
approaches, this paper argues that neither consequentialism nor deontology are
adequate as they are based on highly questionable meta-ethical universalist
presumptions. However, the alternative – favoured by some contemporary
theorists of a radical subjectivism – has a number of weaknesses which make it
a problematic basis for determining moral action. Instead of subjectivism a
modest, multi-functionalist approach, consistent with social virtue theory is
proposed. This practise-based virtue theory avoids the oppressive and
hierarchical dimensions of traditional anarchist universalism, but also evades
the limits of subjectivism.

This renewed interest in anarchist ethics, and especially meta-ethics, has
coincided with the relatively recent development of postanarchism.
Postanarchism is a complex phenomenon which is viewed either as a new hybrid
of anarchism with poststructuralism[^8] or as a return to the radical
political content of poststructuralism[^9]. Postanarchism has developed an
identifiable canon, institutions (such as journals and websites)[^10] and key
terminology. Postanarchism shares many core principles with anarchism such as
a rejection of hierarchy and critiques of state power, but postanarchism has
other central concerns taken from post-structuralism that provides a few
structural differences with some classical anarchisms.

## Anarchist Ethics: A brief overview of the traditions

The are two reasons for concentrating on political-moral traditions. First,
alternative methods, such as those of mainstream analytical philosophy,seek to
identify universal characteristics (necessary conditions),[^11] whilst this
paper argues that such presumptions about universality are deeply problematic.
The second reason is that by concentrating on traditions it allows for
diachronic analyses which take into account historical development of ethical
positions. So rather than concentrate on necessary and sufficient conditions
to identify an ethico-political movement, as the more constrained analytical
philosophies suggest, an account based on traditions can identify core and
peripheral features that alter over time.[^12]

## The anarchist individualist tradition

The diverse traditions of anarchism can be partly identified through their
adoption of different ethical traditions, which have corresponding discourses
and distinctive social apparatuses. The free-market, libertarian-right forms
of anarchism propounded by Robert Nozick and Robert Paul Wolff, are based on a
deontological ethical theory in which the negative rights of the liberal,
sovereign agent take priority.[^13] Consequently anarchism, as the commentator
on Aristotle David Keyt proposes, is boiled down to the single objective of
avoiding coercion,[^14] even if it creates disparities in power. Within the
realms of academic philosophy this version of anarchism has become so
successful that the term is used almost entirely to refer to this form of
right-libertarianism.[^15]

For many Anglo-American political philosophers the key characteristic of
‘anarchism’ has been a rejection of state power as necessarily coercive, and
instead prioritised individuals coming together to make consensual
agreements.[^16] It is via this account of anarchism that the highly
influential works by Nozick and Wolff have helped to shape the Anglo-American
philosophical version of anarchism as one in which the central concern is the
freedom of the individual to make consensual agreements and a substantive
rejection of any coercive imposition, especially, but not exclusively, from
the state. The myriad of articles that followed Nozick and Wolff, whether
critical or supportive of philosophical anarchism, acted to confirm this
individualist interpretation of ‘anarchism’. These texts frame the central
question of ‘anarchism’ to be whether autonomous agents were obligated to obey
the state.[^17]

A significant difference between social anarchism and right-libertarianism is
that the first prioritises the contestation of hierarchical power.
Right-libertarianism, by contrast, not only accedes to but celebrates economic
hierarchies of power gained through free-market contracts.[^18] Whilst
right-libertarians, and that section of individualist anarchism associated
with them, view individual enforceable market contracts as the paradigm for
all interaction, other anarchisms regards contractual relationships as
hierarchical and coercive. Liberal contracts are viewed as hierarchical
because they give greater power to those with larger wealth and tend to
exacerbate economic inequalities.

Right-libertarianism’s preferred social-relationship, the contractual
agreement, is considered coercive for two reasons. First, rather than
representing freedom, capitalism, which requires labour to create surplus
value, forces workers to sell their labour to survive. Proletarians have no
choice but to sell their labour because commonly held sources of goods are no
longer available, having been enclosed or privatised.[^19] Second,
liberalism’s contractual relationships require enforcement, thus they
presuppose an apparatus of control and sanction to ensure obligations are
met.[^20]

As a result right-libertarian versions of anarchism have a distinctive set of
agents, moral principles and practices that are quite distinct from other
forms of anarchism. Given individualists acquiescence to, and even support of,
intensifying hierarchies of power (based on wealth), they would not be
recognised as an anarchism at all by those constellations of anarchism which
place the contestation of such hierarchies at the core of their philosophy.

## The anarchist consequentialist tradition

By contrast, the other popular conception of anarchism comes from the
insurrectionary tradition, often associated with Sergei Nechaev. Nechaev’s
consequentialism permits hierarchical and repressive interventions. Nechaeve
justifies highly coercive tactics if they efficiently bring about the
millennial event – the social revolution.[^21] A similar ends-based normative
anarchist ethic can be identified both in proto-anarchist writings, such as
William Godwin’s, and more recently (though perhaps only as a rhetorical
flourish) in Class War’s slogan of achieving victory in the class conflict,
‘through any means necessary’.[^22]

There are two main problems associated with this form of consequentialism,
problems which make it inconsistent as a core principle of anarchism. The
first is a meta-ethical issue, raised by G. E. Moore (but can also be
recognised in David Hume), that there is a problem with identifying the good
with a naturally occurring phenomena such as happiness. This one is addressed
later with respect to the critique of universalism made by postanarchists,
such as Saul Newman.

The second problem is a normative and applied one: by prioritising ends over
means, individuals become reduced to mere instruments, and are robbed of
autonomy and dignity. Utilitarianism is instrumentalist, the success of a plan
is determined by the success in meeting its objectives. As Max Weber
describes, instrumentalist reason considers that: ‘A person acts rationally in
the “means-ends” sense when his action is guided by consideration of ends,
means and secondary consequence.’[^23] Instrumentalism allows for oppressed
subject groups to be used as mere implements, further reducing their autonomy.

Consequentialism predetermines the objectives: pleasure or satisfaction of
desires or revolution. Consequentialists imposes these ends onto others,
usually an agent whose resources to determine their own goals has been
depleted. The moral agent becomes merely the instrument used to reach this
end. The objectified individual can be treated in an authoritarian manner if
it is the most efficient means to reach the predetermined end. Radical
theorists similarly blame capitalism for turning the autonomous subject into a
mere human resources in the production process.

It is for this reason that Karl Marx lambastes utilitarianism as the
appropriate philosophy for the rising bourgeois class. Rather than human
activity generating intrinsic goods, labour is judged only according to
meeting its ultimate goal the maximising of pleasure.[^24] Marx argues that
Mill identifies the maximisation of happiness with increasing financial
returns, as through greater returns more products are available to meet
greater satisfaction of consumer’s desires.[^25] Rather than lits being a
self-creative action, labour is under the direction of others seeking the most
efficient production of goods, and thus becomes ‘torture’.[^26]

The two competing theoretical positions of consequentialism and deontology
have been combined in the Rawls-like anarchism of activists such as Giovanni
Baldelli and Donald Rooum. Both strongly echo Kant’s commitment to individual
sovereignty based on reason,[^27] but their vague individualist anarchism has
more in common with John Rawls’ distributive liberalism than the
right-libertarianism. Baldelli’s economic policy for instance, distinguishes
between essential and non-essential goods and labour, and ensures that whilst
an essential minimum is provided to all, non-essentials act as a spur for
greater initiative which have minimal redistribution.[^28] This not only
corresponds with Rawlsian distribution but also anticipates Michael Albert’s
Participatory Economics (Parecon).[^29] Thus they fall foul both of criticisms
that they acquiesce to the generation of hierarchies of wealth, whilst also
interfering with individual freedom.

## Prefigurative tradition

Another alternative to the consequentialist-deontological divide is the less
overtly theorised alternative of an anarchist virtue ethics. Elements of a
virtue theory can be observed in the oft-repeated principle within anarchism
that means have to be in accordance with (or prefigure) ends. Bakunin, for
instance, criticised Nechaev precisely because the latter could not ‘reconcile
means with ends.’[^30] Prefiguration avoids the ends/means distinction of
rights based and consequentialist ethics; instead the means used are supposed
to encapsulate the values desired in their preferred goals.[^31]

Prefigurative anarchism is consistent with the main features of Alasdair
MacIntyre’s virtue ethics. Anarchist virtue theory stresses the immanent
values of particular practices rather than the externally decided
(consequentialist) values that will accrue, and these practices, which are
rich in use-values, collectively build to the most fulfilling type of
social-setting. It views goods as being inherent to social practices rather
than seeing goods as being external to the act. These practices have their own
rules, which are negotiable and alter over time.[^32] Such an approach is
rarely explicitly stated partly as a result of the decline in virtue theory
due to the rise of Enlightenment approaches to ethics. Nonetheless, both as a
cultural residue[^33] and as a more systematic approach to analysing moral
choices, the language and aims of virtue approaches still arises in anarchist
discourse. Virtue theory is consistent with Peter Kropotkin’s account of
anarchism in The Encyclopaedia Britannica, in which it is defined as including
the:

> “…development of all his [sic.] faculties, intellectual, artistic and moral,
> without being hampered by overwork for the monopolists, or by the servility
> and inertia of mind of the great number. He would thus be able to reach full
> individualization, which is not possible either under the present system of
> individualism, or under any system of state socialism.”[^34]

Kropotkin’s virtue account is based on an essentialist view of human nature in
which appropriate behaviours are those that lead to the fullest development of
the natural individual. Vices, by contrast, are those that veer away from the
innate goal. However, an account of virtues need not require such an
essentialism, and can be based just on those practices that generate the
fullest internal goods; vice-like behaviours, by contrast, would be those that
undermine practices which have immanent goods, and lead to societal
decomposition,[^35] thereby requiring even greater managerial control.

The development of greater managerial oversight is the result, argues
MacIntyre, of the Enlightenment approaches to ethics. Modern morality seeks
universal, rational grounds for decision-making, yet has produced only
irresolvable disputes[^36] and debilitating scepticism.[^37] Thus
disagreements become settled on the basis of overt power or psychological
ploys.[^38] MacIntyre’s criticisms of Enlightenment moral theory are
consistent with the meta-ethical concerns raised by postanarchists, though
they diverge in terms of solution.

## Postanarchisms

Postanarchism is the most recent reconfiguration within the broader anarchist
family. Postanarchism has incorporated poststructural theoretical concerns
alongside core anarchist concerns surrounding power and agency. As a result of
this new combination, it has raised important questions about the metaphysical
status of ethical claims. Leading writers within postanarchism, such as Lewis
Call, Todd May, Saul Newman and more recently Simon Critchley,[^39] have
highlighted the moral context of metaphysical considerations. Because of the
diversity of ethical and meta-ethical approaches within postanarchism, this
paper, concentrates on Newman’s useful critique of universalism, which is
based on reasserting Max Stirner’s egoism in contemporary political analysis.
Newman, through Stirner, accurately highlights many of the weaknesses in
anarchist universalism. However, it is argued here that Newman’s alternative –
a radical subjectivism – has a number of weaknesses, which make it a
questionable basis for determining moral action. Instead of Stirnerite egoism,
a modest, multi-functionalist virtue approach evades the limits of
subjectivism without resorting to a potentially restrictive and hierarchical,
universalist ethic.

## Anarchism and Universalist Meta-Ethics

The two standard normative ethical approaches associated with Enlightenment
and embraced by different constellations of anarchism have been the
deontological approaches of the libertarian-right, and the consequentialist
approaches, either of Nechayev. By contrast anarchists in response to the
deficiencies within mainstream Enlightenment thought have either embraced
amoralism or subjectivism. CrimethInc provide a good example of amoralism with
their rhetorical question: ‘should we serve employers, parents, the State,
capitalism, moral law before ourselves?’, which implicitly accepts that that
moral law exists but should have no binding power.[^40] Many postanarchists
have been critical of the universalist claims that underpin the main normative
ethical approaches, and have tended towards a subjectivist stance.
Universalism comes in three main forms within meta-ethics, and each is
rejected on broadly similar lines by postanarchists. These three main forms
are:

1.  *Naturalism*: that standards for right conduct are independent of the
    observer and fixed by nature and discoverable through empirical
    observation;
2.  *Rationalism*: that universal rules can be distinguished by the use of
    reason and reflection (Kantian rationalism);[^41]
3.  *Intuitionism*: that these general, ahistorical principles can be
    determined through the use of a separate moral sense or intuition.[^42]

Moral naturalism is most associated with utilitarianism. It assumes there is
some natural phenomenon, like happiness or the satisfaction of desires, that
constitute an identifiable grounds for the good. For naturalists, like John
Stuart Mill, the good is scientifically identifiable. Mill argues that
empirical observation demonstrates the veracity of utilitarian
principles.[^43]

Paul McLaughlin, whose recent contribution to the philosophy of anarchism,
*Anarchism and Authority*, reiterates the classical anarchist position of
meta-ethical universalism, claiming that moral statements are ‘facts’ like
scientific propositions which refer to states external to human operators.
Thus, they have the same status as objectively verifiable propositions, though
like any scientific finding they are open to challenge and revision.[^44] This
is what McLoughlin refers to as ‘anarchist realism’.[^45] The term ‘realism’,
by contrast, is used here to refer to Immanuel Kant’s ethic, which is
similarly universalist, but which rejects the view that fundamental ethical
principles are distinguishable through scientific study. Kant argues that, as
phenomena are transitory and observation uncertain, reason alone can identify
the universal, categorical principles for binding, moral practice.

Intuitionism, the theory that universal moral truths are discovered not
through observation but through a separate moral sense, can be found within
anarchism, though rarely in an explicit form. The lack of overtly Intuitionist
terminology in classical anarchism can be explained by the fact that G.E.
Moore’s work which first named and defended the theory was published just
after the main writings of the classical anarchist canon. However the main
theme of intuitionism that there is a separate ‘moral sense’ that identifies
the good is perhaps compatible with features of Kropotkin’s and Bakunin’s
works, where they appear to propose that there is some instinct or drive which
is the basis for, and identifies, socially benevolent acts.[^46] However,
given the obvious weaknesses of intuitionism it is largely ignored in favour
of alternatives. Intuitionism regards moral truths to be universal and
pre-given. Consequently, when there are normative and meta-ethical conflicts
over whether positive rights exist, or whether the interests of current
generations have greater precedence than future ones, appeals to intuitions
cannot help. Different parties to a debate have distinctive and incompatible
intuitions. Indeed Bakunin, elsewhere, views claims to innate moral sense as
an ‘absurdity’ that acts only to reinforce dominant and oppressive norms and
takes moral principles into ‘theology’ – a domain outside critical
discourse.[^47] For the most part, much (but by no means all) of the classical
anarchist canon proposes either a rationalist or scientific naturalist
approach to identifying and verifying good action.[^48]

The political philosopher, George Crowder, claims that: rationalist,
naturalist and to a lesser extent intuitionist, responses were adopted by
classical anarchists such as Bakunin, Kropotkin and Pierre-Joseph Proudhon,
because they provided an alternative to the hierarchical and statist moral
teachings justified by the church.[^49] The assumption that natural moral laws
can be discovered through application of scientific method or through a single
universal reason might have an underlying egalitarian ambition. The shift of
ethics away from religious institutions, suggests that moral laws are
discoverable by all and apply equally to all. However, as postanarchists such
as Call, May and Newman, have argued, these claims to universal standards of
morality (what is referred to as ‘universalism’) have other repressive
characteristics, which make them incompatible with anarchism.

## The Postanarchist Meta-Ethical Challenge

Amongst those, within the anarchist canon, whose anti-universalism is most
developed is Max Stirner and his influential text *The Ego and Its Own*. It is
regarded by Newman as providing the source for a distinctive (post)anarchism
that avoids the restrictive essentialism of the classical anarchist
canon.[^50] Other postanarchists use more overtly Nietzschean sources, not
withstanding Nietzsche’s professed distaste for any systemised political
doctrine with which he identified ‘anarchism’. Nietzsche’s anarchist admires
readily admit to his aversion to programmatic anarchist strategies,[^51] it
is, however, his attacks on universalist political ethics that they find most
useful. This is either directly through his primary texts themselves, or
through poststructuralist interpreters such as Gilles Deleuze, Michel Foucault
and Jacques Derrida.[^52] However, admiration for Nietzschean criticism is not
confined to the postanarchists; it is also present in anarchist thinking from
earlier anarchist traditions, as exemplified by Guy Aldred[^53] and Emma
Goldman.[^54] More recently, social anarchists such as Daniel Coulson have
argued that Nietzsche has relevance for the tactical developments of more
contemporaneous class struggle anarchism.[^55]

For simplicity, the concentration will be on Stirner’s critique, as
Nietzsche’s is more open, as the examples of Aldred, Coulson and Sean Sheehan
have suggested to more social versions of anarchism. Call, for example,
explains that Nietzsche identifies how social forces play an important role in
the construction of the aesthetic project.[^56] This is a stance that is
rejected by Stirner. This is not to suggest, as John P. Clark proposes, that
Stirner is ‘validly’ placed within the individualist anarchism tradition,[^57]
despite his evident influence on the individualist tradition.[^58] Stirner’s
rejection of any fixed social principle, such as property rights[^59] and his
condemnation of free-market competition,[^60] would rule out a direct
correspondence with the philosophical individualist tradition of Wolff and
Nozick.

Both Stirner and Nietzsche reject the universalism of realism –– and both
(according to Call and Newman) posit in its place that the creation of values
is the product of an always changing individual project.[^61] Thus many
postanarchist theorists, like John Moore, place Stirner and Nietzsche together
because of their shared rejection of realism and their subjectivist
alternative.[^62] The postanarchists who follow Stirner (and Nietzsche) reject
universalism in both its realist and naturalist forms on three main grounds.
First, it would mean that external, universal standards would be shaping
destinies, rather than individuals creating their own goals. Second, the
application of universal principles promotes rather than eliminates
hierarchies of power. Finally, there are no epistemic bases to universal
rules, and thus the discovery and the promotion of such rules are, instead,
the product of oppressive social powers. Each of these criticisms are
addressed in turn.

### Disempowerment: Universal principles and agent freedom

Postanarchists reject universalism because if there were universal laws for
social interaction it would foreshorten the possibilities for moral subjects
to determine their own ends. If there are universal, set standards then moral
agents would have to live up to these, and thus be denied the freedom to
determine their own values.[^63] Postanarchists, such as Newman (through
Stirner), suggest that anarchism is not just limited to freely choosing
between right and wrong action (traditional Humanism), but requires being able
to influence what constitutes ‘the right’. The universalising of moral rules
regulates human activity and restricts agent freedom and self-creation.[^64]

There are possible replies to this. Some anarchist thinkers who do appeal to
universal standards claim this does not necessitate a commitment to their
coercive imposition. There is, as Crowder discusses, a difference between
claiming that there exists universal principles of moral action and the claim
that others have the right to impose them.[^65] This distinction opens up the
possibility of an anarchist amoralism: that there are universal standards of
right or wrong but that they have no binding power on the individual.[^66]
Bakunin’s account in God and the State provides a noteworthy instance: even if
there was a God, and therefore God-given, universal laws, it would not mean
that we would have to obey them.[^67]

There are a number of replies to both amoralism and the moral universalist.
The first is that it is simply inconsistent. Apparent amoralists like Bakunin
and CrimethInc collective do appeal to moral standards in their writings that
seek to guide and inspire action against hierarchies of class and gender and
propose alternatives to the deadening tedium of managed activity.[^68] The
amoralist is right that moral discourse need not provide binding regulation,
but this does not mean it does not influence human action through guidance,
provocation or warning. The problem is that for moral universalists, if norms
are fixed and absolute then the degree of autonomy is nonetheless restricted.

By identifying certain standards as eternally ‘the good’, universalists do
prescribe, even if it is just through social pressure, norms of behaviour, and
because these are universal, there is no possibility for adaptation or change.
Thus, the criticisms of anarchist realist moral philosophy still stands, as it
allows for the coercive power of public opinion, even if such opprobrium of
public opinion is more diffuse than state imposed sanctions.[^69] Further, by
having moral standards outside of social deliberation, it means that
individuals are not free to influence the production of norms and values. A
virtue theory, which sees valuative principles generated in social practices,
and open to deliberation and alteration, avoids this problem.

### Realism and hierarchy

The second criticism of moral universalism — namely that it is inevitably
hierarchical – appears, at first glance, to be somewhat counterintuitive. For
a single, categorical law applicable to all, regardless of class, gender or
ethnicity, appears to support the egalitarian motives that the major classical
anarchists professed. It is for this reason that ethical realism still has
advocates within sections of the radical egalitarian movements.[^70] However,
identical universal rights or attempts to impose one single law of value (such
as the hedonic calculus, or the governance principles of the free-market) onto
all would privilege those whose desires fitted this natural order, rational
criteria or intuitions that structured the social order.

An example of the ways in which universalist claims can result in hierarchies
of power, comes from Kropotkin’s description of mutual aid as ‘an empirically
discovered law of Nature’ which determines moral principles.[^71] If this view
of the origins of ethical principles is read as a form of moral realism, as
Crowder does,[^72] then it prioritises those individuals who are most able to
develop and practise mutual aid. Those who lack ‘natural sympathy’ are no
longer classed by Kropotkin as humans but as ‘monsters’.[^73] Rules which
apply to all regardless of context ignore, and therefore disadvantage, those
who are in an unequal position to begin with.

The imposition of a single, universal set of moral principles, as Newman
points out, again with reference to Stirner, means creating institutions
capable of imposing this standard.[^74] It extends the power of the state and
its functionaries, and also restricts the areas for difference and
pluralism.[^75] By contrast, a view of the good which is based on social
practices, does not promote uniformity, as distinctive practices have
different norms (and agents) and would not require a universal set of
regulations to be imposed from outside. For instance the rules of chess, which
are different to those of football or poker, are not required to be imposed on
the players (though of course it is also possible to coerce people into
playing); paricipants merely must share and abide by these principles in order
to gain the benefits from the game, such as improved concentration and
patience.[^76]

### Epistemological problems

The final criticism is one pursued most rigorously by Newman, through Stirner,
that there are no ultimate grounds for claiming universal truths. Newman
initially concentrates on the anti-essentialist grounds for rejecting
universal claims to truth, that there is no natural entity or intuitive
pre-given quality which constitutes the ‘good’. Appeals to external
authorities such as God or abstractions such as ‘society’ rest on unknowable,
untestable constructions: ‘a new spook, a new “supreme being”’.[^77] Even
appeals to essential human attributes are inevitably incomplete: ‘nothing that
is designated as my essence exhausts me’.[^78] For whatever is imposed as a
definition of the essential self can always be transcended. Instead these
appeals to abstractions hide the fact that moral rules (or ‘fixed ideas’) are
simply the result of unchallenged irrational traditions[^79] that frequently
serve the interests of powerful individuals.[^80] In their place, Stirner
argues, the individual should concentrate only on their ever-changing needs
and desires, and take responsibility for constructing an account of the good
which meets these desires: ‘Ownness created a new freedom; for ownness is the
creator of everything.’[^81]

Even the realist assumption that reason can identify universal criteria for
the good is open to critique by postanarchists. Foucauldians identify how
different social practices have their own distinctive discourse and mode of
reasoning.[^82] The questioning of a universal form of reason (logos) is of no
surprise to logicians. There are a multiplicity of different logics, which
have distinctive semantics, syntaxes and axioms: from the binary classical
logics to the many-valued intuitionist logics, plus modal logics, temporal
(linear and circular) logics, fuzzy logics and the numerous variations and
cross-pollinations of these. It is curious, therefore, that reason is assumed
to be singular.

Rejection of a singular account of logos does not necessarily mean embracing
irrationalism, though some poststructuralists might occasionally slip into
such an incoherent and facile position. An alternative is to recognise that
social practices and forms of knowledge have their own logics, which may
overlap. The underlying rules that govern the discursive features of these
practices are largely stable although contestable and changeable.[^83] Rather
than adopt irrationality or rely upon a single logos, reason is regarded as
contextual, being generated by and supportive of, the social practices or
traditions of which it is a part. Whilst the axioms of classical logic are
likely to be stable features of most established social practices, this does
not mean they are universal. Even logicians identify that the axioms of
classical logic do not apply in each and every domain of human social enquiry
– such as sub-atomic particle physics. It would seem to misunderstand romantic
attachment if was expected that love was only meaningfully expressed in the
form of (for example) the syllogism or well-formed propositional formula.

## Against Subjectivism

Stirner and Newman, against the dangerous hierarchical and oppressive account
of morality offered by the universalists, propose in its place a form of
subjectivism. The individual is freed from the constraints of universal laws
to create their own morality. However, whilst the critique of universalism is
convincing, there are problems with this proposed subjectivist solution. The
belief that the individual (or individual consciousness) is the fundamental
basis for the construction of, and justification for, moral values has a
number of fatal flaws for an anarchist or any proponent of meaningful, social
action: 1) that it is fundamentally solipsistic, denying dialogue and
discourse and the possibility of moral evaluation; 2) it recreates social
hierarchies of the form rejected by the core principles of anarchism; and 3)
that Stirner’s own meta-ethical account is epistemologically unsound as it
ignores its own social construction.

### Disempowerment: Solipsism

Stirner’s critique of moral realism, however, is replaced by a commitment to
the self as the sole and ultimate source of moral knowledge. Stirner posits a
radical individualism, with the self creating its own values: ‘If it is right
for me therefore it is right’.[^84] Newman stresses that Stirner’s ‘self’ is
not the fixed, rational accumulating ego of deontological ethics; it is one
which is in constant flux, making and remaking itself.[^85] This is because
any description is bound to be incomplete because the creativity and
subversiveness of the ego can undermine or transform any definition.[^86]

However, it is only this self, abstracted from any social commitments or prior
concerns, which is the source of moral knowledge. It alone decides what
constitutes moral action, and it decides on its own terms. ‘I am the creative
nothing, the nothing out of which I myself as creator create everything’.[^87]
Thus, Stirner’s ego can legitimise the theft or any other action that the ego
at that moment requires to fulfil its temporary project. So too, for Call,
Nietzsche’s creative subject constructs its own laws and values.[^88] There
can be no external challenge to it from outside, as the self is the ultimate
source, and arbiter, of moral knowledge. This would foreclose all debate and
mean that no values could be challenged. But clearly anarchists do have
meaningful ethical debate, and this requires a shared moral discourse in order
for decision-making with regards to evaluation, and selection, of tactics.

### Recreation of hierarchy

The Stirnerite postanarchists like Call and Newman are right in identifying
how the claim to be acting on behalf of abstract universal values provides the
grounds for coercively imposing practices onto (less powerful) others.[^89]
However, a criticism raised by universalist theorists like McLaughlin is that
Stirner’s anarchism recreates social hierarchies, in which the only morally
worthwhile entity is the egoist. Even in the voluntary union of egoists, the
other has no external status and can be used instrumentally according to one’s
power.[^90] If the universalist criticism of Stirner’s subjectivism is
correct, then this recreation of social hierarchies constitutes a rejection of
one of the core principles of anarchism. There are two grounds for this
criticism, one largely defended by Newman, the other less easily accommodated.

The first is that this account of Stirner views him as proposing a Hobbesian
‘ego’ selfishly pursuing its own interests without regard to others. This
account seems consistent with McLaughlin’s criticism of Stirner. There are
certainly textual references that support such an interpretation.[^91] Newman,
who identifies this line of criticism within Clark’s older scholarly
study,[^92] provides a defence.[^93] Newman replies that Stirner’s project
concerns individual liberation from the tyranny of others and the fixing of
one’s identity to set ideas rather than the subjugation of the less powerful
to the dictates of the powerful ego.[^94]

However, this response, which is not entirely consistent with Stirner’s
writings,[^95] is a more persuasive and interesting argument. It does,
however, give rise to a second criticism: that Stirner creates a binary divide
between the liberated ego with whom one can have temporary union on one side
and, on the other, the common herd. By concentrating on the development of the
individual subject’s own development (or ‘becoming’) it ignores, as Frank H.
Brooks identifies, the situation of the unenlightened subject. It thus creates
a hierarchy of enlightened egos who can and should act for themselves and the
rest: the benighted masses.[^96]

### Epistemological problems

Stirner’s critique interests Newman precisely because it opens up space for
the creative ego, one unconstrained by a single set place within the social
order.[^97] However, Stirner’s critique does not just provide room for a
critical consciousness, but also denies it has any place within the social
order, as nothing substantive exists beyond the ego. It is this universal
abstraction of the ego from the social context that is subjected to one of the
oldest assaults on Stirner, in the voluminous polemic by Karl Marx in *The
German Ideology*. Marx ridicules both the form of the argument, which he
claims is based on the fallacious shift of the quantifier,[^98] as well as the
conclusion that the ego and the concepts it develops can be divorced from the
social circumstances in which they arise.[^99]

The central liberatory feature of Stirner’s critique is, oddly, one compatible
with Marx: that the individual should be free to develop, creating and
recreating itself, according to their desires. But this, as Marx recognises,
requires material resources. As Paul Thomas points out in his review of Marx’s
critique of Stirner, a person can only freely create themselves – for
instance, to use Marx’s example – as a ‘cattle-rearer’ or a ‘critic’ if there
are the social institutions (without bourgeois divisions of labour) that allow
the individual to pursue these fluid, temporary goals.[^100] An individual,
and their critical consciousness, is built out of social resources.[^101] As
Stirner identifies, the ego requires the social resources of language in which
to reinvent itself, and to think of itself anew, but in doing so, becomes a
*subject* of language.

> “I can only make use of *human* means, which are at my command because I am
> at the same time man. And really I have thoughts only as *man*; as I, I am
> at the same time *thoughtless*. He who cannot get rid of thought is so far
> *only* man, is a thrall of language, this human institution, this treasury
> of *human* thoughts. Language or “the word” tyrannizes hardest over us,
> because it brings up against a whole army of fixed ideas.”[^102]

To express his radical subjectivism, Stirner requires inter-subjective
resources, such as language and institutions such as publishers and
readership. To transcend the restrictions of existing modes of thought or
existing social practices Stirner needs both to recognise their limits, and
the materials they provide – though this ultimately produces new institutions.
Thus, the individual cannot be wholly abstracted out of his social context in
the manner required for Stirner’s subjectivism to be consistent.

## An Alternative to Subjectivism

The alternative to the radical subjectivism of Stirner must not only avoid
those features of egoism which make it internally inconsistent or
irreconcilable with a meaningful anti-hierarchical political practice, but
must also keep those elements of the subjectivist critique that identify the
oppressive features of moral universalism. Whilst a comprehensive account of
such an alternative is impossible in the limited space remaining, a brief
sketch can be presented and at least some initial assessment of whether these
features are mutually compatible.

One alternative is a prefigurative or practical anarchism, based on a social
account of the virtues (based on a revision of MacIntyre’s virtue theory).
This identifies goods as being inherent to social practices,[^103] which have
their own rules, which are negotiable and alter over time.[^104] It stresses
the immanent values of particular practices rather than on the externally
decided (consequentialist) values that will accrue.

Thus, those tactics which are consistent with anarchism are those that are
rewarding in their own terms rather than on the basis of external benefits
alone. The different approaches to political-social organisation provide an
illustration, in which Leninism exemplifies the instrumental approach, whilst
a case from contemporary anarchism provides a contrast. Leninism concentrates
on the external goods of the disciplined party, its success is primarily
judged on its efficiency in reaching the desired goal of revolution.[^105]
However, a different non-consequentialist approach to political organisation
is to view political structures as the manifestation of internal goods, such
as enhancing wisdom and the embodiment of social relationships that disperse
social power.[^106] Standards are generated by, and help to form,
anti-hierarchical social practices. For instance the norms required for
secretly subverting corporate advertising or state propaganda are not
identical to those required to maintain an inclusive, multi-functional social
centre. Whilst different, the norms of both are open, to those entering these
practices, they are open to critical dialogue and can alter over time.

Each anarchist practice produces their own standards, which overlap with
others. The norms by which a successful social centre is run, will be
different to, but bear some similarities with an inclusive, participatory
website or periodical. Thus the standards for the goods, the types of social
relationship that constitute (and are constituted by) non- or
anti-hierarchical practice are observable and assessable within a domain – and
between adjacent domains. So that the relatively stable, and common, norms of
bravery (opposing dominating power), solidarity (reciprocal assistance between
those in a subjugated position) and wisdom (coming to understand the
structures of oppression and the means by which ‘other values’ can be created)
are identifiable within anarchist practices, but are not necessarily
universal. Similar practices involving subtly different actors will generate
distinctive other goods (or bads).

Like the Stirnerite subject, there is no universal agent of change, but one in
constant flux, resisting, challenging or fleeing the changing dominating
powers within a given context. Within these radical practices, it produces its
own immanent values. Because social practices are not distinct but overlap
there are possibilities for links of solidarity across the different domains
between different agents, although there is no universal agent who
participates in all practices. A narrative of anti-hierarchical liberation,
might provide a link between different practices, and provide routes for new
social practices (and new agents to develop). The contestation of hierarchy,
however, does not represent a new universal value. There are contexts in which
goods are immanently developed but a challenge to structures that maintain
inequalities of power is not generated – for instance, children playing in a
sandbox. Thus, the rejection of hierarchy is not a universal guide to action,
though, given the persistence of economic structures and institutions that
enforce and legitimise these inequalities of power, it is highly likely that
the contestation of hierarchy will remain a core anarchist value.

## Conclusion

Whilst many of the main constellations of anarchism, such as individualist and
social anarchisms, differ in fundamental aspects, they do share a commitment
to prioritising ethical discourse. The differences, however, are best
illustrated through unpicking the distinctive forms of normative, applied and
meta-ethics. Both strict consequentialist and deontological anarchisms share
similar weaknesses in that their commitment to moral universalism restrict
agent freedom, recreate hierarchies and cannot provide an adequate account for
the generation and identification of these universals. However, the
alternative adopted by some egoist individualists and postanarchists, i.e.
radical subjectivism, is inadequate on similar grounds. If subjectivism is
right, then it restricts the possibility of meaningful ethical dialogue,
recreates hierarchies between the liberated ego and the rest, and cannot
adequately account for the creative ego, without recourse to the social forms
it rejects.

In place of a subjectivist ethic, this paper has sketched out an alternative,
based on a social account of virtues (but without the underlying essentialism
usually associated with neo-Aristotelianism). This alternative suggests that
values are observable and assessable, and open to discussion, but are
non-universal. They are immanent to the practice or practices in which they
are formed (and which they constitute). These standards are not unique to
discrete practices, but can be found in adjacent social contexts. In anarchism
these virtues are usually addressed in a shared ethical discourse, which
prioritises the contestation of hierarchies, but also promotes the production
of other non-reductive goods.

[^1]: This paper is a revised and extended version of the paper ‘Postanarchism
    and Meta-Ethics’ accepted for publication in *Anarchist Studies*
    (publication due October 2008).

[^2]: This version is told by BashtheFash, on Urban75, 23rd April, 2007

[^3]: From Max Weber onwards, irrationality and coercive force have been
    linked. A presumption which is highly questionable. For examples of the
    association of anarchism with irrationality and/or violence see the
    Electoral Commission advertisement headed ‘Are You a Crazy Anarchist’ in
    for instance, *Daily Mirror*, September 17, 2002 and J. Margolis, *The
    Truth About Relativism* (Oxford: Blackwell, 1991): 49.

[^4]: G. Crowder, *Classical Anarchism: The political thought of Godwin,
    Proudhon, Bakunin and Kropotkin* (Oxford: Clarendon, 1991): 157.

[^5]: M. Smith, ‘Realism’ in P. Singer, edt., *A Companion to Ethics* (Oxford:
    Blackwells, 2001), pp. 399–410

[^6]: See for instance the defence of Bakunin’s proposal to develop public
    institutions which maintain and embody ‘integrity’ (Anarchist (Communist)
    Federation, *Basic Bakunin* (Coventry: Anarchist Communist Editions, 1991)
    available on line at *Spunk Press*,
    <[http://www.spunk.org/texts/writers/bakunin/sp001862.html](http://www.spunk.org/texts/writers/bakunin/sp001862.html)>,
    last accessed 2 June 2008; the description and assessment of activists
    resisting military action as ‘brave’ (Anarchist Federation, ‘War Resisters
    in Israel’, *Resistance* No. 35,
    <[http://www.afed.org.uk/res/resist35.html](http://www.afed.org.uk/res/resist35.html)>
    last accessed 30 May, 2008) whilst by contrast state institutions are
    referred to as ‘cowardly’ for systematically using force to belittle and
    subjugate those in deprived situations (Anarchist Federation ‘UK Terror HQ
    Found!’, *Resistance* No. 13
    <[http://www.afed.org.uk/res/resist13.html](http://www.afed.org.uk/res/resist13.html)>
    last accessed 30 May, 2008).

[^7]: Ian Bone, one of the founders of Class War, for instance, lambasts
    anti-elitist radicals for coming from, and using, their privileged
    backgrounds to attain leadership roles within supposedly anti-
    hierarchical institutions and social movements. See for instance ‘Fake
    Labour Toff..........Is A Toff! Exclusive!!!’, Ian Bone
    <[http://ianbone.wordpress.com/2008/05/18/fake-labour-toffis-a-toff-exclusive/](http://ianbone.wordpress.com/2008/05/18/fake-labour-toffis-a-toff-exclusive/)>
    last accessed, 3 June 2008 ‘More *Guardian* Nepotism -Monbiot Horror!’,
    February 28, 2008
    <[http://ianbone.wordpress.com/2008/02/23/more-guardian-nepotism-monbiot-horror/](http://ianbone.wordpress.com/2008/02/23/more-guardian-nepotism-monbiot-horror/)>
    last accessed 3, June 2008, and his book *Bash The Rich* (Bristol:
    Tangent. 2006).

[^8]: S. Newman, ‘Is There a Postanarchist Universality? A Reply to Michael
    Glavin’, *Perspectives on Anarchist Theory*, (Fall 2004): 40–53: 50
    <[http://olymedia.mahost.org/vol8no2.pdf](http://olymedia.mahost.org/vol8no2.pdf)>,
    last accessed June 2, 2008.

[^9]: J. Adams ‘Postanarchism in a Bombshell’, *Aporia Journal*, Issue 2,
    <[http://aporiajournal.tripod.com/postanarchism.htm](http://aporiajournal.tripod.com/postanarchism.htm)>,
    last accessed 23 June, 2008.

[^10]: Such as the UK-based journal *Anarchist Studies*, the American
    Institute of Anarchist Studies and its publication, *Perspectives on
    Anarchism* and the Turkish magazine *Siyahî*.

[^11]: M. Freeden, *Ideologies and Political Theory* (Oxford: Oxford
    University Press, 1996): 6.

[^12]: Freeden, 1996: 54.

[^13]: R. Wolff, *In Defence of Anarchism* (London: Harper Torchbooks, 1976);
    R. Nozick, *Anarchy, State and Utopia* (Oxford: Basil Blackwell, 1988).

[^14]: D. Keyt, ‘Aristotle and Anarchism’ in R. Kraut and S. Skultety, eds.,
    Aristotle’s Politics: Critical Essays (Oxford: Rowan and Littlefield,
    2005), pp. 203–22: 204.

[^15]: See for instance D. Copp, ‘The Idea of a Legitimate State’, *Philosophy
    and Public Affairs*, Vol. 28, No. 1 (Winter, 1999), pp. 3–45: 11; D.
    Knowles ‘The Domain of Authority’, Philosophy, Volume 82 (Jan. 2007),
    pp.23-43: 42; F. Lovett, ‘Can Justice be Based on Consent’, *Journal of
    Political Philosophy*, Vol. 12 (2): 79–101: 86

[^16]: D. Keyt, ‘Aristotle and Anarchism’ in Richard Kraut and Steven
    Skultety, eds., *Aristotle’s Politics: Critical Essays* (Oxford: Rowan and
    Littlefield, 2005), pp. 203–22: 204; Knowles, ‘The Domain of Authority’,
    *Philosophy*, Volume 82 (jan. 2007), pp. 23–43: 42.

[^17]: For instance R. Dagger, ‘Philosophical Anarchism and Its Fallacies: A
    Review Essay’, *Law and Philosophy*, Vol. 19, No. 3. (May, 2000), pp.
    391–406; C. Gans, *Philosophical Anarchism and Political Disobedience*
    (New York: Cambridge University Press), Thomas D. Senor, ‘What if there
    are no Political Obligations? A Reply to A. J. Simmons’, *Philosophy and
    Public Affairs*, Vol. 16, No. 3. (Summer, 1987), pp. 260–268 and A. John
    Simmons ‘The Anarchist Position: A Reply to Klosko and Senor’, *Philosophy
    and Public Affairs*, Vol. 16, No. 3. (Summer, 1987), pp. 269–279.

[^18]: Nozick, 1988: 161–62.

[^19]: In this regard anarchists agree with the analytical Marxist G. Cohen
    ‘The structure of proletarian unfreedom’, in R. Goodin & P. Pettit,
    *Contemporary Political Philosophy: An Anthology* (Oxford: Blackwell,
    2002), autonomist Marxist H. Cleaver, *Reading ‘Capital’ Politically*
    (Brighton: Harvester, 1979) and K. Marx, Capital, Vol 1. (Harmondsworth:
    Penguin, 1992).

[^20]: A. Berkman, *The ABC of Anarchism* (London: Freedom Press, 1987), 64
    and 69, a view also share by S. Freeman, ‘Illiberal Libertarians: Why
    Libertarianism is not a liberal view’, *Philosophy and Public Affairs*,
    Vol. 30, No. 2 (Spring 2001); pp. 105–151: 124–25.

[^21]: S. Nechaev, *Catechism of the Revolutionist* (London: Violette Nozieres
    Press and Active Distribution, 1989): 9.

[^22]: See Godwin’s view that acts should be judged through a utilitarian
    calculation of the social good that is produced. For instance he assesses
    the right to private property on an utilitarian evaluation of its social
    goods and harms in W. Godwin, *The Anarchist Writings of William Godwin*
    (London: Freedom, 1986): 64–65 and 136.

[^23]: M. Weber,(1995), *Max Weber Selections in Translation*, (Cambridge:
    Cambridge University Press, 1995), 29.

[^24]: K. Marx, *The German Ideology* (Moscow: Progress, 1976), 436.

[^25]: Marx, 1976: 437; K. Marx, *The First International and After: Political
    writings*, volume three Harmondsworth: Penguin, 1992a), 399; See also
    Marx, *Capital* Volume 1 (Harondsworth: Penguin, 1976), n. pp.758–59.

[^26]: K. Marx, *Early Writings* (Harmondsowrth: Penguin, 1992b), 278.

[^27]: G. Baldelli, *Social Anarchism* (Penguin: Harmondsworth, 1972); D.
    Rooum, ‘Anarchism is About Individuals’ in Freedom Press, ed., *‘Freedom’:
    A hundred years* (London: Freedom, 1986), pp. 56–57.

[^28]: G. Baldelli, *Social Anarchism* (Penguin: Harmondsworth, 1972): 120–25.

[^29]: J. Rawls, *A Theory of Justice* (Oxford: Oxford University Press,
    1973); M. Albert, *Moving Forward: Programme for a Participatory
    Democracy* (Edinburgh: AK Press, 2001).

[^30]: M. Bakunin, ‘Mikhail Bakunin to Sergey Nechayev, June 2, 1870’ in
    *Bakunin on Violence* (New York: Anarchist Switchboard, 1993e), 9.

[^31]: A. Carter, *A Radical Green Political Theory* (London: Routledge,
    1999): 266–67; Jonathan Purkis and James Bowen, ‘Conclusion: How anarchism
    still matters’ in J. Purkis and J. Bowen, *Changing Anarchism: Anarchist
    theory and practice in a global age*, Manchester: Manchester University
    Press, 2005), 220; See too Uri Gordon, *Anarchism and Political Theory:
    Contemporary Problems*, PhD Thesis, Mansfield College, Oxford University,
    2006: 172 and 203, available at
    <[http://ephemer.al.cl.cam.ac.uk/\~gd216/uri/0.1_-_Front_Matter.pdf](http://ephemer.al.cl.cam.ac.uk/\~gd216/uri/0.1_-_Front_Matter.pdf)>,
    last accessed 30 June, 2007.

[^32]: MacIntrye, *After Virtue: A study in moral theory*, second edition
    (London: Duckworth, 2006): 155–56.

[^33]: See MacIntyre on the fragmentation of ethical discourse at the start of
    *After Virtue*: 1–2.

[^34]: P. Kropotkin ‘Anarchism’, *The Encyclopaedia Britannica* (1910),
    available online at
    <[http://recollectionbooks.com/siml/library/anarchismEncyBrit.htm](http://recollectionbooks.com/siml/library/anarchismEncyBrit.htm)>,
    last accessed April 2, 2007.

[^35]: MacIntyre, 2006: 194–95.

[^36]: MacIntyre, 2006: 6–8 and 152.

[^37]: MacIntyre, 2006: 118.

[^38]: MacIntyre, 2006: 71.

[^39]: Lewis Call, *Postmodern Anarchism* (Oxford: Lexington Books, 2002); T.
    May, *The Political Philosophy of Poststructural Anarchism* (P
    Pennsylvania, USA: Pennsylvania University Press, 1994); S. Newman *From
    Bakunin to Lacan: Anti-authoritarianism and the dislocation of power
    Anarchism* (Oxford: Lexington Books, 2001); S. Critchley, *Infinitely
    Demanding: Ethics of commitment, politics of resistance* (London: Verso,
    2007).

[^40]: CrimethInc, ‘No Masters’, *CrimethInc*,
    <[http://www.crimethinc.com/texts/atoz/nomasters.php](http://www.crimethinc.com/texts/atoz/nomasters.php)>,
    last accessed 18 June, 2008.

[^41]: Raphael, *Moral Philosophy* (Oxford: Oxford University Press): 18–22.

[^42]: Stuart Brock and Edwin Mares, *Realism and Anti-Realism* (Stocksfield:
    Acumen, 2007): 113–118.

[^43]: Mill argues that whilst the grounding framework of ethics, like the
    first principles of science, are not amenable to absolute scientific
    proof, observation, nonetheless, demonstrates that utilitarian modes of
    assessment are right (J.S. Mill, *Utilitarianism* Oxford: Oxford
    University Press, 2000: 50, 52, 81–82).

[^44]: McLaughlin, 2007: 40.

[^45]: McLaughlin, 2007: 40n.

[^46]: M. Bakunin, *The Political Philosophy of Bakunin* (New York: Free
    Press, 1953): 146; P. Kropotkin, *Ethics: Origin and development*
    (Montreal: Black Rose, 1992), 11–12.

[^47]: Bakunin, 1953: 125–27.

[^48]: For example Bakunin, 1953: 239–41; 415; Kropotkin, 1992: 20; 31.
    Caution is advised against interpreting the classical anarchists as akin
    to Positivists. The term ‘science’ in these texts need not refer to the
    adoption of a singular hypothetico-deductive model of discovery, but could
    just refer to a range of systematic modes of study.

[^49]: C. Crowder, *Classical Anarchism: The Political Thought of Godwin,
    Proudhon, Bakunin and Kropotkin* (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1991): 89.

[^50]: Newman, 2001: 51.

[^51]: Call, 2002: 40–42; A. Koch ‘Dionysian Politics: The anarchist
    implications of Friedrich Nietzsche’s critique of Western epistemology’ in
    J. Moore, ed, *I Am Not a Man, I am Dynamite! Friedrich Nietzsche and the
    anarchist tradition* (Williamsburgh, USA: Autonomedia, 2004): 49–63, 49;
    Newman, 2001: 48.

[^52]: Bey, 2003: 126; Lewis Call: 2002, 40–56; May, 1994: 89–91; Franco
    Riccio, ‘The “Death of God”’ in J. Moore, ed, *I Am Not a Man, I am
    Dynamite!: Friedrich Nietzsche and the anarchist tradition* (Williamsburgh
    Station: Autonomedia, 2004), pp. 64–75.

[^53]: Guy Aldred, ‘Friedrich Nietzsche’ in J. Moore, ed, *I Am Not a Man, I
    am Dynamite!: Friedrich Nietzsche and the anarchist tradition*
    (Williamsburgh Station: Autonomedia, 2004), pp. 9–11.

[^54]: L. Starcross, ‘“Nietzsche Was an Anarchist”: Reconstructing Emma
    Goldman’s Nietzsche Lectures’ in J. Moore, ed, *I Am Not a Man, I am
    Dynamite!: Friedrich Nietzsche and the anarchist tradition* (Williamsburgh
    Station: Autonomedia, 2004), 29–39; Kropotkin too admired Nietzsche’s
    assault on the ‘half-hearted moral conceptions’ of the dominant powers
    (Kropotkin, 1992: 7).

[^55]: D. Colson, ‘Nietzsche and the Libertarian Workers’ Movement’, in J.
    Moore, ed, *I Am Not a Man, I am Dynamite!: Friedrich Nietzsche and the
    anarchist tradition* (Williamsburgh Station: Autonomedia, 2004), pp.
    12–28.

[^56]: Call, 2002: 48–49; Sheehan, admits such a progressive reading would
    constitute a ‘selective interpretation’ (2003: 77).

[^57]: J. Clark, *Max Stirner’s Egoism* (London: Freedom, 1976), 93.

[^58]: Clark, 1976: 89–91.

[^59]: M. Stirner, *The Ego and Its Own* (London: Rebel Press, 1993): 259.

[^60]: Stirner, 1993: 260–63.

[^61]: Call, 2002: 51 and Newman: 2001: 61.

[^62]: John Moore, ‘Lived Poetry: Stirner, anarchy, subjectivity and the art
    of the living’ in J. Purkis and J. Bowan, eds., *Changing Anarchisms:
    Anarchist theory and practice in a global age* (Manchester: Manchester
    University Press, 2004): pp. 55–72.

[^63]: May, 1994: 127–28; N. J. Jun, ‘Deleuze, Derrida and Anarchism’,
    *Anarchist Studies*, Vol. 15, No. 2 (2007), pp. 132–56: 138–39; a view
    also held, if somewhat inconsistently, by Bakunin (Bakunin, 1953: 125).

[^64]: S. Newman, *Unstable Universalities: Poststructuralism and radical
    politics* (Manchester: Manchester University Press, 2007), 123–24.

[^65]: Crowder, 1991: 171–72.

[^66]: CrimethInc, ‘No Masters’, 2008.

[^67]: Bakunin, ‘God and the State’, Anarchism.Net,
    <[http://www.anarchism.net/godandthestate.htm](http://www.anarchism.net/godandthestate.htm)>,
    last accessed 30 May, 2008.

[^68]: CrimethInc, 2008; Bakunin, 2008.

[^69]: R. Amstell, ‘Chasing Rainbows? Utopian Pragmatics and the search for
    Anarchist Communists’,
    <[http://www.geocities.com/collectivebook/rainbows.html](http://www.geocities.com/collectivebook/rainbows.html)>
    last accessed 12 April 2008.

[^70]: See for instance Norman Geras’s defence of Enlightenment ‘universalist
    values’ in ‘Marxism, the Holocaust and September 11: An Interview with
    Norman Geras’, *Imprints: A Journal of Analytical Socialism* Vol. 6 no. 3
    (2002), online at
    <[http://eis.bris.ac.uk/\~plcdib/imprints/normangerasinterview.html](http://eis.bris.ac.uk/\~plcdib/imprints/normangerasinterview.html)>,
    last accessed 13 May, 2008 and N. Geras *Solidarity in the Conversation of
    Humankind* (London: Routledge, 1995); G. Purchase, ‘Anarchy in the UK
    \#2’, *Rebel Worker*, Vol. 27 No. 2 (199) (April–May 2008), pp. 15–20: 15.

[^71]: Kropotkin, 1992: 21.

[^72]: Crowder, 1991: 157–68. Other commentators, such as Jesse Cohn and Shawn
    Wilbur, have suggested that Kropotkin is merely trying to open up a space
    for benevolent social action against the realism of conservative social
    Darwinists, who held that the battle for survival determined all social
    behaviour, J. Cohn and S. Wilbur ‘What's Wrong With Postanarchism?’, *From
    the Libertarian Library*, July 8 2007
    <[http://libertarian-library.blogspot.com/2007/07/cohn-and-wilbur-whats-wrong-with.html](http://libertarian-library.blogspot.com/2007/07/cohn-and-wilbur-whats-wrong-with.html)>
    last accessed 8 March 2008.

[^73]: Kropotkin, 1992: 40.

[^74]: Stirner, 1993: 98–99.

[^75]: S. Newman, *Power and Politics in Poststructuralist Thought: New
    theories of the political* (London: Routledge, 2005), 17.

[^76]: MacIntyre, 2006: 188.

[^77]: Stirner, 1993: 130; Newman, 2001: 60–61.

[^78]: Stirner, 1993: 366.

[^79]: Stirner, 1993: 43–44; Newman, 2001: 65–66.

[^80]: Stirner, 1993: 4; Newman, 2001: 64

[^81]: Stirner: 1993: 163; See also Newman, 2001: 69.

[^82]: See Foucault’s descriptions of the development of clinical diagnosis,
    anatomy and pathology, with their constructed medical gazes and
    distinctive, albeit overlapping, principles, institutions and discourses
    in *Birth of the Clinic* (London: Routledge, 1997); May, 1994: 98–99.

[^83]: Call comes close to this account in his description and endorsement of
    Derrida’s critique of a single universal reason (logos), Call, 2002: 71.

[^84]: Stirner, 1993: 191.

[^85]: Newman, 2001: 67–68.

[^86]: Stirner, 1993: 366.

[^87]: Stirner, 1993: 5.

[^88]: Call, 2002: 51.

[^89]: Call, 2002: 49 and 55; Newman, 2001: 61.

[^90]: McLaughlin, 2007: 154.

[^91]: For instance: ‘Let me say to myself, that what my might reaches to is
    my property; and let me claim as property everything that I feel strong
    enough to attain.... Here egoism, selfishness, must decide’ (Stirner,
    1993: 257).

[^92]: Clark argues that by prioritising the individual’s own values Stirner
    ‘still exalts the will to dominate, and still accepts the authoritarian
    consciousness’. (Clark, 1976: 94).

[^93]: Newman, 2001: 71; Clark, 1976.

[^94]: Newman, 2001: 71.

[^95]: See for instance Stirner’s rejection of state-imposed equality for
    relationships in which others become ‘my property, my creatures’.
    (Stirner, 1993: 179).

[^96]: F. Brooks, ‘American Individualist Anarchism: What it was and why it
    failed’, *The Journal of Political Ideologies*, Vol. 1, No. 1 (1996), 85.

[^97]: Newman, 2001: 71–72.

[^98]: K. Marx, *The German Ideology* (Moscow, USSR: Progress, 1976), 295–97.

[^99]: Marx, 1976: 305–08.

[^100]: P. Thomas, *Karl Marx and the Anarchists* (London: Routledge and Kegan
    Paul, 1980), 148–49; Marx, 1976: 53.

[^101]: Marx, 1976: 231.

[^102]: Stirner, 1993: 345–46.

[^103]: MacIntyre, 2006: 187–88.

[^104]: MacIntyre, 2006: 190–91.

[^105]: See for instance V. I. Lenin, *What is to be Done?* (Oxford: Clarendon
    Press, 1963): 149.

[^106]: See for instance many of the methods discussed by the Trapese
    Collective, *Do it Yourself: A handbook for changing our world* (London:
    Pluto, 2007), which not only promote productive, social goals, but which
    are internally rewarding, as they produce creative dialogues, amusement
    and expand knowledge and skills.
