% Squatter's Rights and Adverse Possession: A Search for Equitable Application of Property Laws
% Brian Gardiner
% 1997–1998

> “Human history has been an endless struggle for control of the earth's
> surface; and conquest, or the acquisition of property by force, has been one
> of its more ruthless expedients. With the surge of population from the rural
> lands to the cities, a new type of conquest has been manifesting itself in
> the cites of the developing world. Its form is squatting, and it is
> evidencing itself in the forcible preemption of land by the landless and
> homeless people in search of a haven.”
>
> — C. Abbrams[^1]

## I. Introduction

According to the United States Census Bureau, the total world population on
January 1, 1998, will be 5,886,645,394 people.[^2] Using average annual growth
rate percentages, the Census Bureau estimates that the world population will
be approximately 9,368,223,050 by the year 2050.[^3] With this geometric rise
in world population, invariably there will be an increase in scarcity and
competition for vital resources, including food, fossil fuels, raw materials,
shelter, and land. With increasing disparities in wealth and resources between
the world's rich and poor, many of the world's citizens will continue to be
forced into homelessness. Already, the United Nations (U.N.) estimates that
“one hundred million [persons] have no home at all” while “more than one
billion persons throughout the world do not reside in adequate housing.”[^4]
An accurate number of currently homeless persons in the United States is
difficult to establish; however, numbers range from 350,000 to 3,000,000
persons.[^5] In raising the world's consciousness of the condition of the
homeless or poorly housed, the U.N. has established the right to housing as an
international human right.[^6] As of 1994, 129 nations had signed or ratified
the International Covenant on Economic, Social, and Cultural Rights, under
which states must “retain ultimate responsibility for shortfalls in housing or
deteriorating housing conditions.”[^7] Despite broad declarations by the U.N.
and attempted remedies by individual nations, deplorable economic conditions
and housing shortages continue to plague the homeless and the under-housed in
both developed and least-developed countries (LDCs). Frequently, the homeless
find themselves needing both food and shelter. Thus, squatting on unoccupied
lands, buildings, forests, or even garbage dumps becomes an attractive remedy
that squatters frequently practice.[^8] *Black's Law Dictionary* defines a
squatter as:

> “[o]ne who settles on another's land, without legal title or authority. A
> person entering upon lands, not claiming in good faith the right to do so by
> virtue of any title of his own or by virtue of some agreement with another
> whom he believes to hold the title. Under former laws, one who settled on
> public land in order to acquire title to the land.”[^9]

Traditionally, both governments and citizens have viewed squatters as
criminals who take advantage of neglectful municipalities and land owners. The
U.N.'s Commission on Human Rights, the Sub-Commission on Prevention of
Discrimination and Protection of Minorities issued a report illuminating
“Twelve Misconceptions and Misinterpretations of the Right to Housing” and
attempting to dispel the notion that “squatters are criminals.”[^10] The
Report found that generally an “impression is created that pavement dwellers
are anti-social elements, and that a majority of them are criminally inclined,
unemployed and not interested in working.”[^11] However, many squatters
contribute to local economies; for example, the Asia Coalition on Housing
Rights found squatters who worked an average of “9.9 hours per day,” compared
to higher income groups who only worked “7.3 hours per day.”[^12] Plainly,
society should not always view squatters as benevolent revolutionaries
fighting for equity and justice; however, there are times when squatters and
squatters' movements must be recognized for their noble and courageous efforts
in developing efficient uses of property and alleviating one of society's
ills.

In several nations, including the United States, Germany, and Great Britain, a
squatter may gain legal possession of land through adverse possession. Adverse
possession is “[a] method of acquisition of title to real property by
possession for a statutory period under certain conditions.”[^13] Adverse
possession generally has five elements that a claimant must establish: the
possession must be (1) open, (2) continuous for the statutory period, (3) for
the entirety of the area, (4) adverse to the true owner's interests, and (5)
notorious.[^14] In some jurisdictions, if a squatter or an adverse possessor
can establish these elements within the statutory period, then she may take
legal and rightful title to the property. The policy supporting adverse
possession is that the rule forces landowners to maintain and monitor their
land. Moreover, this policy discourages owners from “sleeping” on their
property rights for an indefinite period. While squatting problems and adverse
possession may often involve private land owners, governments are often large
land holders whose interests should be examined.[^15] Adverse possession
promotes efficient and economic use of land, thereby serving important
economic and social ends. However, there are problems associated with adverse
possession, including, but not limited to, monitoring problems, safety
concerns, and environmental degradation.[^16] Unlike squatters in many Western
countries, squatters and the homeless in LDCs often face unclear property
rights and inefficient property allocation systems. While both squatters in
LDCs and squatters in more-developed nations face severe housing shortages,
the squatters in LDCs, with fewer resources and less-developed legal systems
at their disposal, face an even steeper climb than their Western counterparts.
This note will survey squatting, squatters' rights, and adverse possession
from an international perspective. Section 11 examines early property law and
the development of adverse possession. More specifically, the section examines
Roman law, English common law, European civil-law, early American property
law, and the impact of colonialism on LDCs. Section III examines the
theoretical developments that have helped define adverse possession and the
property rights of squatters. Section IV begins by examining squatting within
the common law traditions of the United States and Great Britain. Section IV
then explores squatting and adverse possession on the European continent
within the context of the civil-law tradition. The section ends with a
discussion of squatting and adverse possession within the United States and
within several LDCs. Finally, the note concludes by demonstrating how
squatters are affected by the current framework of property policies and laws.
In considering possible alternatives to the current laws, the author concludes
that such alternatives would serve legitimate property interests and benefit
societies at large by promoting general goals of equity and efficiency.

## II. History of Squatting, Squatters' Rights, and Adverse Possession

### A. Early History

Squatting has a long history, and it is probably as old as history
itself.[^17] Adverse possession and the misuse of land through waste was
discussed as long ago as 2250 B.C. in the Code of Hammurabi.[^18] At one time,
the laws offered little in the way of property guarantees, but today some
property systems contain increased certainty of possession, transfer, and even
title recording.[^19] In investigating modern property rights, the past is
certainly relevant.

Squatting has been influenced by the Roman property law tradition, especially
as it evolved in the civil-law countries in continental Europe.[^20] Emilie De
Laveleye in *Primitive Property* describes the long history of property rights
from the Greco-Roman tradition. “From the earliest times in their history, the
Greeks and Romans recognized private property as applied to the soil….”[^21]
Modern scholars have identified the Roman property system as “[a]
well-articulated organization of private property.”[^22] This sophisticated
and dynamic property system is a microcosm of the Roman Empire itself. Under
the Roman Law Codes, “an owner was said to have virtually unlimited rights to
preside over property without state interference.”[^23] In the agrarian
economy of ancient Rome, the goal of most property owners was not to “increase
their holdings.”[^24] In fact, Roman policy and tradition allowed a man only
“as much public land as he could cultivate himself.”[^25] These policies
favored the interests of the whole Empire over the interests of any individual
land owner. Consequently, this property system did not allow a large
landholder to waste potentially economically-viable land.[^26] As for the
utilitarian Roman system of property, “[i]n the earliest times the arable land
was cultivated in common, probably by the several clans; each of these tilled
its own land, and thereafter distributed the produce among the several
households belonging to it.”[^27] This property system, which was designed to
create wealth for the Roman state as a whole, even applied to the holders of
vast land under a system known as *precarium*.[^28] Under *precarium*, a
wealthy man with a surplus of land could allow another person to cultivate
land and that person would maintain property rights “against third parties but
not against the owner himself.”[^29] *Precarium* was yet another Roman policy
aimed at curbing or ending the waste of land and resources. This system of
property attempted to maximize the utility of land.[^30] After the fall of
Rome, real property rights in Europe drastically changed. However, the legacy
of Rome would greatly influence the development of “modern Continental law” in
the Napoleonic codes of France and in Germany's Civil Code.[^31] The tribes of
northern Europe had a system of property that was “built on family estates,
one where ownership was fragmented and circumscribed, [and] replaced the
notion of the unencumbered individual owner.”[^32] In a system of estates, no
one but the sovereign had absolute property rights. This system of property
was based upon seisin, wherein “one who was ‘seized’ held all of the legal
rights that the law recognized as capable of being concentrated in an
individual.”[^33] After great political and social upheaval, northern
Europeans would reestablish strong individual property rights in the common
law tradition.

### B. Great Britain and the Common Law Tradition

The common law tradition in England went through a substantial transformation
from a system that promoted heredity and limited access to land to a system
that emphasized the protection of individual property rights and free
alienation. In feudal times, the monarchy maintained property rights through
primogeniture, ultimogeniture, and other hereditary systems that kept land
from being freely alienated. “Land was the essential pivot of feudal society …
and thus had special importance."[^34] The French established this system of
tenure in England after the Norman conquest of that country in 1066,[^35] and
it was “a system of government through the agency of landholders.”[^36] The
early remedy for loss of possession was to “oust the ‘disseisor’ by force …
[and] if one did not do so promptly one lost the right.”[^37] The system of
feudalism eventually “decay[ed] within two hundred years of its introduction
by the Normans.”[^38] In the fourteenth century, “the rural middle class began
to develop,” and “an economy based upon wages and not upon rendering services”
caused the death of feudalism and the birth of strong individual property
rights in real property.[^39] The metamorphosis from state- to
individual-control of property in England is reflected in John Locke's
writings on the theory of property. Locke saw a specific and limited role for
the state in regulating property for the individual:

> “the necessity of preserving men in the possession of what honest industry
> has already acquired, and also of preserving their liberty and strength,
> whereby they may acquire what they farther want, obliges men to enter into
> society with one another, that by mutual assistance and joint force they may
> secure unto each other their properties…”[^40]

Locke also asserted that the state should simply provide for “the peace,
riches, and the public commodities of the whole people.”[^41] Blackstone's
*Commentaries*, written in the eighteenth century, further illustrate the
changes in property law that occurred after the feudal periods. Blackstone
described the ownership of property as “the sole and despotic domination which
one man claims and exercises over the external things of the world in total
exclusion of the right of any other individual.”[^42] Once the state
relinquished absolute control of property, property rights and
individualrights were to be forever linked.

Along with strong individual property rights, both adverse possession and the
free alienation of property emerged as legal principles in England. Adverse
possession was first identified in England as a legal doctrine in 1275 in the
Statute of Westminster I, chapter 39, which fixed 1189 as the earliest date
from which a plaintiff in a property action could establish seisin of his
ancestry. Seisin was critical to the establishment of a property claim in
Great Britain,[^43] and the establishment of this fixed date for seisin
greatly disadvantaged those who were trying to establish adverse possession
claims since it became more difficult to establish clear claims as the years
passed. This unfair policy changed in 1623 with the Statute of
Limitations,[^44] which created a twenty-year limitation.[^45]

The statute of 1623 was the adverse possession statute that many American
colonial jurisdictions used as a prototype for their own laws.[^46] The
express goals of this statute were the “avoiding of Suits” and the “quieting
of Man's Estates.”[^47] This statute reflected an early desire in England to
prevent the waste of land resources and to force owners to monitor their lands
properly. Further, by avoiding legal actions and quieting title, this statute
provided a framework for decreasing the often high transaction costs
associated with land disputes, and allowed for greater economic development
based on the new certainty of title. The Statute of Limitations ”was amended
by 3 & 4 Win. IV, c.27 (1833), which included a provision giving title to the
possessor after the running of the period.”[^48] This statute and other
provisions changed the statute of limitations for an adverse possession claim
to twelve years. Statutes of limitations were critical for the proper
development of property rights as they “[were] considered [to be] necessary
and expedient for the general welfare.”[^49] The Statute of Limitations and
adverse possession policies gave English citizens clear and defined mechanisms
to expedite their property claims.

Great Britain may not have enjoyed its vast economic prosperity in the
nineteenth century had the policy makers developed a property system that led
to uncertainty and inefficiency. Further, these strong property rights have
carried forward to modern times, giving squatters and land owners alike useful
tools to further their varied interests. Great Britain has established a
strong tradition of property and adverse possession rights for the United
States and other common law countries to follow. This tradition promotes the
values of uniformity, efficiency, and at least attempted impartiality within
the property system.

### C. Continental Europe and the Civil-Law Tradition

Roman law also had a strong impact on the creation of the civil-law tradition
in continental Europe. Unlike the common law tradition, the civil-law
tradition emphasized sources of law such as “statutes, regulations, and
customs”.[^50] Within this tradition,

> “codified civil law was the heart of private law, and the dominant concepts
> of the codes were individual private property … This individualistic
> emphasis was an expression … of the rationalism and secular law of the age.
> The emphasis on rights of property and contract in the codes guaranteed
> individual rights against intrusion by the state.”[^51]

Although different in form, the civil-law traditions essentially had the same
purpose of many of the common law traditions, which was to secure and protect
citizens' property interests. Despite the similarities, however, there were
some important differences between civil- and common law property concepts. In
civil-law countries, the principle of unity that “makes the owner unable to
split his right arbitrarily into powers of various kinds … [is] one of the
essential differences between the Civil Law systems and the Anglo-American
law.”[^52]

### D. United States: Following Great Britain's Lead

Tracing the origins of adverse possession in the United States is a difficult
task because of “legislative and judicial confusion in the field of adverse
possession of land … The reason for the difficulty, but not its answer, lies
in the mists of history.”[^53] Not surprisingly, early American property law
followed English law closely, as “[m]ost American Jurisdictions first adopted
the English model of a twenty-year limitation.”[^54] These American adverse
possession statutes had

> “negative and procedural importance, namely, the barring of an action, or of
> conduct, designed to recover land, when the bringer of the action has
> delayed too long. Their chief importance, however, in the law of property,
> [rested] on their proprietary and affirmative consequences, in constituting
> one means for the acquisition of ownership.”[^55]

The first adverse possession statute, in the form of a statute of limitations,
appeared in North Carolina in 1715.[^56] One early and critical decision
involving adverse possession was the case of *Johnson v. M'Intosh*.[^57] In
*M'Intosh*, the plaintiff claimed title to a parcel of land that was titled to
him from the Piankeshaw Indians; the defendant's title came from a grant from
the United States government. Recognizing the principle of discovery and
conquest, Chief Justice Marshall found that:

> “[t]he United States, then, have unequivocally acceded to that great and
> broad rule by which its civilized inhabitants now hold this country. They
> hold, and assert in themselves, the title by which it was acquired. They
> maintain, as all others have maintained, that discovery gave an exclusive
> right to extinguish the Indian title of occupancy, either by purchase or
> conquest … An absolute title to lands cannot exist, at the same time, in
> different persons, or in different governments. An absolute, must be an
> exclusive title, or at least a title which excludes all others not
> compatible with it. All our institutions recognise [sic] the absolute title
> of the crown, subject only to the Indian right of occupancy … This is
> incompatible with an absolute and complete title in the Indians.”[^58]

Despite what the above excerpt may suggest, Justice Marshall perhaps may have
been uncomfortable with the decision he ultimately reached. The case presented
the Court with a predicament: had the Court decided in favor of the Indians,
thousands of property titles across the United States would have been clouded,
causing severe chaos and a hindrance to commerce. Thus, this case of Indian
title and adverse possession wrought an injustice based on policies that
supported landholders and clarity of title. However, the history of American
property development and westward expansion illustrates the tension between
Indians, squatters, ranchers, homesteaders, farmers, railroad interests,
miners, and many others who all sought land and resources. Today, as land has
become more scarce in the United States, the law of adverse possession has
moved toward shorter statutes of limitations. Despite some poor legal
decisions and policies, the shortening of these statutes of limitations has
helped adverse possessors and increased the duties of land owners to monitor
their land.

### E. Colonialism and the Impact on Property Rights

The nineteenth century saw the rise of European power and hegemony due to the
industrial revolution and the resulting increase in technology and wealth in
Europe. Due to increased technology, European nations found distant areas of
the world to be more accessible and desirable as these states sought to
increase their wealth and power. Consequently, Europeans established colonies
on every continent and every unclaimed area in a quest for wealth and
resources. Colonization of the underdeveloped world had a direct impact upon
many nations. “Pressure on and confiscation of land was a fundamental feature
of colonialism, especially in East and Central Africa.”[^59] Even after they
departed, the colonial powers left their former territories with “a general
atmosphere of suspicion of individual land rights” due to their emphasis on
land acquisition. This lasting influence, although not present in every former
colony, manifested itself in flawed property systems that lacked certainty and
uniformity of property rights. Furthermore, the instability of property
systems resulted in slower economic development and a. general loss of
individual rights that often had tragic results.

## III. Property From a Theoretical Perspective

A theoretical understanding of property is helpful in making proper
determinations regarding property laws and policies. Utilitarianism is
applicable and influential to property law and to the law of adverse
possession. Jeremy Bentham, whom some academics have called the “father of
modem utilitarianism,”[^60] pointed to a connection between “full property
rights, security, and happiness.”[^61] Bentham emphasized this link when he
stated “[p]roperty and law are born together and die together.”[^62] Because
of the importance of property law, there is the “need for a consistent and
sufficiently public institution of property rights … Structures could vary
greatly from liberal ownership as long as the structure is public and
consistent.”[^63] Bentham did not advocate a system of forced equality, but
simply a system of guaranteed property rights similar to what the Romans had
provided for their citizens.

In order to achieve the goal of efficiency, a property system must strive to
lower transaction costs. Transaction costs are those expenses or costs that
impact parties negotiating a dispute. Transaction costs from litigation,
evictions, and property damage can place a heavy burden on individuals and
society as a whole. In economic terms, these burdens are often reflected in
“externalities,” i.e., costs borne by persons who are not parties to the
immediate transaction. Externalities are “market imperfections … like
pollution.”[^64]

Harold Demsetz in *Toward a Theory of Property Rights* stated that "[p]roperty
rights are an instrument of society and derive their significance from the
fact that they help a man form those expectations which he can reasonably hold
in his dealings with others. These expectations find expression in laws,
customs, and mores of a society.”[^65] The significance of property rights is
illustrated by the fact that countries that afford few individual rights
generally have property systems that cloud claims and potential claims to
property.[^66] With respect to this general goal of efficiency, property
rights should provide “incentives to achieve a greater internalization of
externalities.”[^67] Such internalization allows society to deal effectively
with problems by lowering overall transaction costs. In accordance with the
philosophical underpinning of utilitarianism, adverse possession must be
equitably applied to promote efficiency and fairness. Regarding the current
situation concerning property rights, squatters, and land use, the Economic
Commission for Europe reported the following:

> “[h]igh levels of squatter housing indicate that the formal land market does
> not provide affordable residential land for housing, forcing households to
> occupy land illegally. High levels of this indicator also suggest that
> eviction may not be a realistic option, but rather calls for policies and
> programmes which lead to strengthening tenure security in squatter
> settlements, thus facilitating higher levels of housing investment.”[^68]

Following the philosophical foundations of utilitarianism, governments should
strive for more efficient use of land as both populations and scarcity of
housing increase. To achieve the goal of more efficient and ultimately more
beneficial use of land, squatting, homesteading, and more liberal application
of adverse possession laws-even if such actions are contrary to the interests
of governments, municipalities, or private land holders-should be encouraged.

## IV. Modern Squatting and Adverse Possession

### A. Great Britain and the Common Law Tradition

Despite squatting's long history, squatting became a significant problem in
Great Britain in the late 1960s and 1970s.[^69] Because of high property taxes
and urban renewal projects, there were many vacant buildings in Great Britain
at that time.[^70] In 1968, a wave of squatting hit Great Britain as a result
of these conditions.[^71] The squatters in Britain were not simply homeless
persons looking for shelter. Instead, the squatting movement in Great Britain
took on a strong political flavor as squatters urged changes in existing
property policies. This lower class “revolution” received great public
sympathy, which is common in many squatting movements.[^72] Nonetheless, in
the 1970s, this sympathy waned when some squatters shifted from urban
squatting to residential squatting.[^73] In this new wave of squatting, a home
owner might leave on an extended vacation only to come back and find his home
occupied by squatters. Under the Criminal Law Act 1977, “the person who comes
back from holiday may use or threaten to use violence to oust squatters found
in his home; but the squatters will commit the offence [sic] [of threatening
violence without lawful authority] if they retaliate.”[^74]

As evidence of the strength of the current squatting movement in Great
Britain, agencies currently exist that show potential residential squatters a
list of vacant houses or buildings.[^75] The agencies have photos for the
prospective squatters to examine, and they give the squatters instructions to
"“not cause damage when entering properties and … [to] not change the locks”
because if so, “the landlord can do nothing except apply for an eviction
order.”[^76]

In Great Britain, these “commercial squatters” often reflect poorly upon
squatters as a whole. In Katherine Bowen's letter to the editor, *The Worst
Kind of Squatter*, she describes the ordeal of having commercial squatters
moving into viable “letting retail premises.”[^77] Commercial squatting has
been described as “a highly organised business, with groups now set up to
provide information on vacant properties, arrange false leases and keys and
even introduce commercial squatters to suppliers of stock, which is often of
dubious origin.”[^78] However, with respect to the commercial and residential
squatter, it is sound public policy for governments to differentiate between
the squatter who inhabits because of necessity and the squatter who simply is
out for profit: public policy should allow residential squatters greater
latitude for basic humanitarian reasons.

In 1995, there were an estimated 60,000 squatters in Great Britain.[^79] Many
of these squatters were among the estimated 700,000 homeless people in Great
Britain.[^80] Today, these squatters may only be removed after a civil hearing
in the British courts at considerable expense to the homeowner. Each year
about 10,000 property owners seek expulsion of squatters through the civil
courts.[^81] Unfortunately, this wave of squatting has also prompted British
government officials to enact criminal legislation specifically aimed at the
squatters. One anti-squatting provision is found in the Criminal Justice and
Public Order Act of 1994. The offense of “aggravated trespass” was
specifically aimed at squatters.[^82] Under the new laws, a property owner who
has a potential squatter problem will “receive a hearing three days after
applying to a county court.”[^83] If the squatters fail to appear, then the
squatters “have 24 hours to leave and face up to six months' jail and fines of
up to £5,000 if they stay.”[^84]

In protest of this new law, 250 British squatters advocates conducted a “mock
trial” in the garden of Michael Howard, the British Home Secretary, and the
police took no action.[^85] The lack of action by the police, due to limited
resources, was in part caused by the various new responsibilities the Criminal
Act places on police. Critics of this legislation claim that these laws “have
the effect of criminalising a large number of people, including homeless
persons squatting in empty properties; travelers living in caravans on land
other than authorized official sites… and people participating in a wide range
of demonstrations or public protests.”[^86] Nevertheless, in 1995, the rules
were amended in order to allow a “fast track eviction of squatters.”[^87]
Under the 1995 procedure, “landlords and homeowners can now go to court to
obtain an ‘Interim Possession Order’ (IPO) against alleged squatters.”[^88]
Essentially, an IPO gives a squatter twenty-four hours to vacate the premises
or face criminal penalties. The trespass laws represent the policy tightrope
the British government has walked between two distinctly-motivated interests:
the interests of residential squatters with legitimate housing and habitat
concerns, and the interests of the commercial or profit motivated squatters
who move into temporarily-vacated businesses or the homes of people on
vacation. While squatting in Great Britain may present legitimate problems,
criminalizing squatting does not get to the root of the problem of
homelessness.

Like many squatters around the world, British squatters have become an
important part of the communities in which they live, often performing
socially important and valuable functions. Squatters in Brighton, East Sussex,
have taken over a row of “dilapidated Victorian cottages … and have turned
them into a brightly-painted terrace.”[^89] These squatters include “students,
a carpenter, a former embalmer and some women with children.”[^90] These
squatters have so endeared themselves to the community that their neighbors
have “sent a 1,500-name petition to their local council asking that they be
allowed to stay.”[^91] Strangely enough, despite the apparent harmony, there
are plans to demolish the cottages and build an office on that site. Thus,
while squatting in England is often legal and justified, squatters using
adverse possession have had mixed results.

In Great Britain, the statutory period for adverse possession is twelve years
under section 15 of the Limitation Act 1980.[^92] Interestingly, in *Mount
Carmel Inv. Ltd. v. Peter Thurlow Ltd.*, the court held that tacking of claims
could exist among squatters: “[i]f a squatter dispossessed another squatter
and the first squatter abandoned his claim to possession, the second squatter
could obtain title to the land by 12 years' adverse possession by both
squatters.”[^93] Thus, some squatters have had success using the English
adverse possession rules. As another example, in 1996, a pair of squatters
“earnt £103,000 from the sale of the Victorian house where they had lived
rent-free for 19 years.”[^94]

It is nearly impossible to evaluate the overall success of the squatters'
movement in Great Britain. At minimum, the squatters in Great Britain have
raised public awareness of the housing crisis and one potential remedy —
squatting. With some unusual but visible exceptions, liberal squatting in
Great Britain seems to have somewhat alleviated the problems associated with
homelessness and the housing crisis. Despite the acts criminalizing squatting,
Great Britain has a climate generally warmer to the plight of squatters.

### B. Continental Europe and the Civil-Law Tradition: Germany

Like many wealthy western countries, Germany has had its share of squatting
problems. Germany also has an established property system that includes rights
of adverse possession. The prevalence of squatting in Germany may be
attributed to the fact that in 1994 the number of homeless individuals was
estimated to be in excess of one million.[^95] Some of Germany's homeless
problems are due to the reunification of East and West Germany, evidenced by
the billions of Deutsche Marks that the West has poured into the East.

The German government has a core of centralized power that is checked by the
powers of the individual states. The German Civil Code and basic law provide
much of the framework and structure for German governance. The most important
laws involving property and adverse possession are found within the German
Civil Code, The Third Book: Law of Property. The first section of the Law of
Property, entitled “Possession,” considers property possession and adverse
possession. The second section of the Law of Property contains a provision
delineated as Section 900, which states: “[a] person, who is registered in the
Land Register as the owner of a piece of land without having obtained
ownership, acquires the ownership, if the registration has subsisted for
thirty years and he has during this period held the piece of land in his
proprietary possession.”[^96] This thirty-year period in Germany represents a
governmental policy that does not promote adverse possession claims.
Typically, the shorter the statutory period, the greater the governmental
interest in preventing owners from “sleeping” on their property rights,
through lack of maintenance, lack of visitation, or a general disregard for
their duties. Despite this lengthy statutory requirement for adverse
possession (especially when compared to other countries), in one particular
squatting situation German authorities found it necessary to compromise and
depart from the written civil-law.

In Hamburg, Germany, a group of squatters who were occupying a block of
buildings won a fourteen-year battle against the government. This prolonged
battle began in October 1981 “when a group of about 100 punks and social
revolutionaries occupied a block of empty houses overlooking the harbour and
owned by the city.”[^97] This site was very important to Hamburg city
officials because it “is near some of Germany's most exclusive hotels and
brothels … [and] city officials feared the squatters would harm tourism.”[^98]
As in Great Britain, the squatters received public support, as illustrated by
a demonstration in 1986 when “10,000 supporters of the squatters marched
through central Hamburg.”[^99] However, a year later the German police
remained unsuccessful in their attempts to evict the squatters from the group
of buildings. Finally, in 1996, the city officials radically changed their
policy, and the city government accepted the squatters and decided to take
“the decisive step toward permanently ending this difficult conflict.”[^100]

This reconciliation is quite different from the approach taken by many
governments, including jurisdictions within the United States, as local
authorities appear quite willing to oppose residential squatters' claims in
American cities.[^101] In this agreement between the German city and the
squatters, the squatters will purchase the buildings for “less than a third of
[their] market value.”[^102] The squatters will shoulder the costs of
repairing and renovating the buildings, and they will pay the city one-half of
overdue rent and utility bills.[^103] This type of compromise should serve as
a model to other municipalities around the world as a way of ending
potentially violent and expensive conflicts. This type of compromise produces
a win-win result. Hamburg may not have received full market value for its
property, but the city was able to avoid costly litigation and/or eviction
costs and the associated expenses of housing the evicted squatters. Further,
by transferring the property rights to the squatters, the government created a
cost-effective remedy to a housing shortage.

### C. Continental Europe and the Civil-Law Tradition: Denmark

Danish legal philosophy has been described as a system “of positivism as well
as of realism in the common and commonplace sense.”[^104] Under this system of
“commonplace sense,” Denmark has had a long history of promoting efficient use
of property. Since 1683, under King Christian V's Danish Code, “twenty years
of possession is required for prescription.”[^105] Under this code, “[i]t is
up to the user-regardless whether his use is lawful or contrary to other
rights-to prove that his prescriptive possession of the property took place
during the necessary period of time.”[^106] If the use of property is for a
general purpose “ownership [of the property] is regularly obtained.”[^107]
However, if the use is “directed for a specific purpose” then “an easement is
obtained.”[^108] Although Denmark does not have a long history of squatting
problems, this theory of “commonplace sense” and “positivism” has been
reflected in the creation of a major squatters' settlement in Copenhagen.

The Free City of Christiana celebrated its twenty-fifth year in 1996. In
October 1971, as a response to housing shortages, an abandoned army barracks
in the Danish capital of Copenhagen was occupied by 800 squatters.[^109]
Squatters call Christiana the “free city” because there they are “free of
rents, free of taxes, and free of laws imposed by the society.”[^110] Part of
the freedom also included the open sale of drugs and collectivized
property.[^111] Because of a governmental policy of “tolerance of diverse
philosophies and lifestyles,” the squatters were able to remain and the
“Ministry of Defense even left on the water and electricity.”[^112]

Although the Christiania experience may seem extreme, it suggests an
interesting housing solution for the United States, Europe, and the Soviet
states. Due to the end of the Cold War, both East and West have many vacant
military complexes. Some of these facilities could be turned over to
squatters, homeless persons, and homesteaders for rapid change into low income
housing. Transfers of military property could quickly change a remnant of the
past into a salient solution to the homeless problem.

### D. Continental Europe and the Civil-Law Tradition: Netherlands

The Netherlands has a long history of squatting and a strong tradition of
adverse possession. Supporters of the squatting movement “numbered tens of
thousands at its heights in the Sixties.”[^113] The Dutch squatters' movement
“lost much of its strength during the 1980s when many of its members were
offered alternative housing over the years.”[^114] Despite its weakened state,
squatting is still a powerful force in the Netherlands. In fact, squatting has
been called “lasting evidence of the continuing anarchic youth movement [in
the Netherlands].”[^115]

The Dutch legal system is considered to “belong to the Romano-Germanic
family.”[^116] The rules for acquisitive prescription of property, i.e.,
adverse possession, are set out in article 3:99 of the Dutch Civil Code:

> 1.  possession; whether there is possession is decided along the lines of
>     generally prevailing views (art. 3:108);
> 2.  possession must have been acquired in good faith. Once a possessor is in
>     good faith, subsequent knowledge will not affect his good faith (3:118
>     par 2).
> 3.  possession must have been uninterrupted. Loss of possession therefore
>     means that a current prescription-period is terminated… (art. 3:103).
> 4.  lapse of time:
>     a.  a period of three years for non-registered movables…;
>     b.  a period of ten years for all other goods… [immovable goods, real
>         property]\(art.%203:119).[^117]

Despite the seemingly strict rules on prescription, Dutch squatters,
particularly in Amsterdam, have had some successes. According to Dutch
historian Han Van Der Horst: “[i]n spite of clear legislation to the contrary,
tolerance had become second nature for the political leaders in the
Netherlands.”[^118] Edward Soja, professor of urban and regional planning at
the University of California, described the squatter movement in Amsterdam as:

> “more than just an occupation of abandoned offices, factories, warehouses
> and some residences. It was a fight for the rights of the city itself,
> especially for the young and for the poor. Nowhere has this struggle been
> more successful than in Amsterdam. Nowhere has it been less successful than
> in Los Angeles.”[^119]

Squatters in the Netherlands have been successful in part due to compromises
by the Dutch government. After the Dutch coronation in 1980, squatters and
police often battled. Like the experiences in Great Britain and Germany, these
battles “brought a great wave of public sympathy, not for the state's
over-reaction but for the young and lawless.”[^120] After the great squatter
battles of 1980, the Dutch government passed “new legislation to tidy up the
rules on empty property” that “requir[ed] local authorities to keep a list of
empty houses and other buildings which could be converted into homes.”[^121]
The new criminal code also protected property from occupation and “squatters
[could] be fined up to $215.”[^122]

Despite the tightening of laws in the Netherlands, squatters have still
enjoyed success. Dutch culture and society emphasize tolerance and compromise,
two qualities needed to address homelessness effectively. Nonetheless, as in
Germany and other countries, there will always be some problems in the
Netherlands related to squatting due to the tension between property rights
and adverse possession. But governmental cooperation and public support of
squatters in the Netherlands have seemingly reduced the specter of violence in
the battle for shelter and land.

### E. United States

English law influences much of the law of adverse possession in the United
States. Despite this background, United States adverse possession law has
taken on its own unique flavor. This is evidenced by the various statutes of
limitations for adverse possession claims that range from five years in
California, Idaho, and Montana, to forty years in Iowa.[^123]

#### 1. New York

In the United States, no city has experienced more urban squatting activity
than New York City. Within the United States, New York is a relatively old
city with diverse regions and many abandoned buildings and factories. New York
State's adverse possession law provides that those who openly and hostilely
possess land for ten years can request title to that land.[^124] An important
case in New York State's adverse possession law is *Van Valkenburgh v.
Lutz*.[^125] In that case, William Lutz “cultivated” a triangular lot, erected
a fence on the lot's borders, built a small shack on the lot, and generally
acted as the owner of the lot for over thirty years, only to have his adverse
possession claim fail because “[t]he proof concededly fail[ed] to show that …
the garden utilized the whole of the premises claimed.”[^126] In *Levy v.
Kurpil*,[^127] which involved a dispute between neighbors over the ownership
of a triangular shaped area of land bordering the two properties, the court
stated that “[a]dverse possession is established by showing possession which
is hostile and under claim of right, actual, open and notorious, as well as
exclusive and continuous for a prescribed 10 year period.”[^128] Despite the
seemingly clear rules on adverse possession in New York, squatters have had
difficulty using them effectively.

In New York City, the “13^th^ Street squatters” received significant attention
because of protests, riots, and subsequent police action. On 13^th^ Street,
the squatters claimed title by asserting themselves as the “homesteaders” of
abandoned buildings owned by New York City.[^129] Many squatters invested
money and “sweat equity” in the properties, “controlled them, secured them,
and behaved in all ways as owners of the property.”[^130] In 1995, the radio
program “All Things Considered” interviewed one of the 13^th^ Street squatters
who estimated that he spent about $6,000 renovating his apartment.[^131] The
city evicted the squatters to make way for a four million dollar low-income
housing project.[^132] The squatters protected their squat by creating a
“flimsy tangle of bicycle frames and barbed wire welded to the metal
stairways.”[^133] New York City Mayor Rudolf Giuliani justified the eviction
based on safety concerns. The squatters claimed adverse possession in excess
of the statutory ten-year period because the 13^th^ Street buildings had been
vacant since 1984. The failure of the squatters to establish adverse
possession claims in court partially rested on their inability to establish
tacking for their claims. It was nearly impossible for the squatters to prove
that they had continually lived in the building for the required ten-year
period. Thus, the squatters lacked the type of documentation required to win
their adverse possession suit.

The struggles of the 13^th^ Street squatters reflect only a limited number of
the difficulties squatters encounter in seeking legal remedies. For instance,
some jurisdictions do not recognize adverse possession claims asserted against
governments or have special rules or limitations periods for those types of
suits.[^134] Moreover, in many cases, squatters lack standing to bring proper
actions. In *Valentin v. Department of Housing Preservation & Development*,
the trial court found that a squatter who instituted a housing action (for
lack of a proper stove and refrigerator) against the City of New York lacked
standing because it would be “incongruous and completely unfair to those
pre-approved applicants who distinctly have a legal priority over those
individuals who assume occupancy of an apartment without regard to their legal
status.”[^135] Despite these adverse decisions, the New York squatters
remained hopeful that they might succeed.

The February 8, 1996 decision in *Walls v. Giuliani*[^136] was considered by
many to be a victory for the squatters in New York City because the court
considered the actual merits of the squatters' case. The case represented a
critical decision for squatters because “[t]he ruling left the door open for
similar legal challenges to be brought by squatters all over the city.”[^137]
In that case, the court held that the squatters had stated a valid civil
rights claim under 42 U.S.C. § 1983 and denied the City's motion to
dismiss.[^138] Mayor Rudolf Giuliani called the district court's ruling
“ideology run amok.”[^139] The 13^th^ Street squatters' short-lived success
came to an end on August 8, 1996, when the New York Supreme Court, Appellate
Division, reversed the district court's decision in *Walls v. Giuliani*.[^140]
Subsequently, to evict the squatters, the New York Police employed a 50,000
pound tank-like armored personnel carrier along with fifty policemen.[^141]
Strangely, despite the city's spirited battles with the residential squatters,
New York City allowed and even encouraged small businesses to squat in an
abandoned court house.[^142] In light of Giuliani's claim of “ideology run
amok,” this action of allowing commercial squatting can be seen as nothing
short of an unconscionable double standard.

The battle over urban territory also raises critical questions about
municipalities and the way they manage their property. The City of New York,
under its Department of Housing Preservation and Development (HPD), currently
admits to holding more than 2,000 buildings vacant — including some 17,000
individual dwelling units that have been vacant for decades — while
bureaucrats argue over how to spend available funds.[^143] Besides the
mismanagement of properties, the HPD has also been accused of fraud. The
petitioner's complaint in East 13^th^ Street Homesteaders' Coalition stated
that the HPD “knowingly mis-characterized, in bad faith, [property] as
‘vacant’ on the Respondent's application for an Urban Development Action Area
Project area designation, pursuant to New York State law, in order to
facilitate state and federal funding programs.”[^144] With several vacant land
holdings and a critical need for housing, does the city have a duty to monitor
its properties? Should the city have a better index of its vacant properties?
The City of New York will be faced with the potentially expensive problem of
having to frequently monitor its vacant properties, especially if squatters
with better documentation are able to bring adverse possession claims to
sympathetic courts and juries.

Groups like the Association of Community Organizations for Reform Now (ACORN),
which introduce legal squatting through homesteading programs, represent a
workable compromise between the interests of the city and the housing concerns
of its citizens.[^145] Beginning in 1985, ACORN was able to “tak[e] possession
of twenty-five vacant, City-owned buildings” in Brooklyn and force “HPD into
meaningful negotiations.”[^146] In New York City, “ACORN has demonstrated how
effective community organizing can pressure the City to release its low-income
housing stock to poor City residents.”[^147] ACORN and “other squatting
efforts are both increasingly common and justified”[^148] as they provide
utilitarian and workable solutions to some housing problems. American urban
municipalities such as New York City, like their European counterparts, must
work towards compromise in order to effectively address the crisis of
homelessness. It only makes sense that governments and squatters or
homesteaders should work together in community partnerships, rather than the
adversarial relationships of the past that yielded riots, police actions,
prolonged litigation, high transaction costs and little in terms of concrete
results.

#### 2. California

California is a large and wealthy state with a large and expanding population
because of internal growth, domestic migration, and both legal and illegal
immigration. The most prevalent squatting problems in California are typically
not found within urban environments.[^149] California law requires the typical
elements for adverse possession: (1) possession must be held either under a
claim of right or color of title; (2) possession must be actual, open, and
notorious occupation of the property in such a manner as to constitute
reasonable notice of that occupation to the record owner; (3) the occupation
must be both exclusive and hostile to the title of the true owner; (4)
possession must be continuous and uninterrupted for at least five years; and
(5) the occupier must pay all taxes assessed against the property during such
five-year period.[^150] Despite the clear requirements of California's adverse
possession law, most of the squatting problems in California stem from abuses
of an 1856 property law.

Middle-class neighborhoods in California have been invaded by squatters guided
by squatters' agencies. These squatters' agencies[^151] have legal standing
based upon the “1856 [law designed] to break up Spanish claims to land after
California changed hands.”[^152] This law allows squatters to enter a dwelling
“as long as a window or door is open or has been left unlocked[;] they can't
break in.”[^153] Often squatting “agents” will look for foreclosed property
and then inform their customers of the ripe pickings. The squatters agree to
pay monthly rent to the agents. These housing agents give their customers
“four to six months in a house … [and] a three-page disclosure on what [they]
do.”[^154] In many ways, this type of squatting is similar to the squatting
promoted by residential squatting agents in the United Kingdom.

One California company, Windsor Pacific, “scours public records for properties
in foreclosure or finds homes that are vacant, looks for ways to enter the
home, and makes its [adverse] claim. If no one objects to the claim, it rents
the home to its customers and may even make an offer to purchase.”[^155] As of
April 1996, this company had thirty-six houses under an alleged claim of
adverse possession. Jay E. Orr, the Riverside County Supervising Deputy
District Attorney, stated: “[t]hese companies have been allowed to flourish
because banks are so far behind on foreclosures.”[^156] The proprietors of
Windsor Pacific ask their “house sitters” to sign a disclosure form that
indicates “Windsor Pacific has attempted to file a notice of adverse
possession, cleaned the house and re-keyed all locks, and notified the lender
it has placed a tenant on the premises.”[^157] This disclosure states that the
tenants are to move out within thirty-days notice, if and when the bank takes
title. Many of these squatters are families that became interested in a
property because of an advertisement for low rental rates.

Typically, these companies will ask for three months rent up front; therefore,
they make money from the house sitters/squatters regardless of the results of
their adverse possession claims. These squatters' agencies maintain that they
are making legitimate adverse possession claims, but such claims are dubious
at best. These companies do not pay property taxes, which would be required
for a proper adverse possession claim under California law. Despite the
inadequacy of such adverse possession claims, it is still true that this
suburban squatting is maximizing the use of land that would otherwise remain
vacant for months or years at a time. One squatters' agent, who was facing
thirty-six felony counts involving houses, reasoned that he was performing a
public service because “[squatting] tells the banks they have to pay attention
to their properties and do something with abandoned houses … It gets banks off
the dime.”[^158] Some law enforcement officials have taken unusual steps in
dealing with squatters' agencies like Windsor Pacific. Sheriffs' deputies are
now telling renters/house sitters/squatters not to pay rent. Sheriffs'
deputies believe that someone has broken into “at least 13 foreclosed homes,
cleaned them up, changed the locks and rented them under the name of Windsor
Pacific.”[^159] If this alleged breaking and entering is true, these actions
would violate California law even under the 1856 adverse possession statute.

Under a utilitarian property theory, a strong argument exists for allowing
temporary use of property. However, this theory is accompanied by the distinct
potential for abuse. The rights or duties of the renters or their agencies
with respect to the occupied property remains unclear. Temporary squatters
with little stake in the property could become careless or destructive and
inflict heavy damage on valuable property. This potential for abuse of
property which has been allegedly adversely possessed places a heavy burden on
property holders to guard and monitor their property interests.

Monitoring can place an extremely heavy burden on property holders such as
out-of-state banks that have foreclosed on property. Serious problems arise
not only when banks find that foreclosed property has been claimed by
squatters, but also when legitimate buyers are attempting to purchase
property. One California couple bid on a $385,000 home only to find that a
squatter had moved in the day before.[^160] In that case, the purchasers
obtained a restraining order that prevented the squatters from remaining in
the house, but such a civil action still may take more than one month to
settle.[^161] While the situation in California does illustrate severe abuses
of squatting and adverse possession, the actions of a few should not
overshadow the efforts of the legitimately homeless who squat in order to
survive.

It is difficult to glean much encouragement from the United States' policies
involving squatters and the homeless. Despite a strong and growing economy,
there is neither a clear solution nor a national priority to reduce the
specter of homelessness in the United States. With severe cutbacks in welfare
and government programs, there is little hope for the homeless in our
Darwinian society, except for that provided by the already overburdened
private organizations. In light of the experiences of European countries,
United States municipalities should change their adversarial attitudes toward
legitimate residential squatters, while continuing to enforce strict property
laws against commercial squatters motivated by profit. A partnership with
squatters who would become homesteaders would serve utilitarian property
interests and would at the same time alleviate homelessness. With a problem as
diverse and widespread as homelessness, governments with little resources
should at least attempt to foster potentially viable homesteading partnerships
in conjunction with other low-income housing enterprises.

### F. Least Developed Countries: Property Laws and Squatting

The lack of established property rights in underdeveloped countries often
hampers both economic and environmental progress. The lack of property rights
in LDCs may be manifested through a lack of title, unclear title, or a lack of
recording, but is generally exhibited through insecure title for landowners.
Jeremy Bentham, in his *Theory of Legislation: Principles of The Civil Code*,
defined property and its importance by stating that “[p]roperty is nothing but
a basis of expectation; the expectation of deriving certain advantages from a
thing, which we are said to possess, in consequence of the relation in which
we stand towards it.”[^162] The lack of title security that citizens of LDCs
face compounds the economic problems of LDCs. For many LDCs, “[l]and titling
has been promoted as the key to broad-based sustainable growth.”[^163] The
current lack of certainty often hampers economic investment because land
owners or squatters will have less incentive to invest work into insecure
land.[^164] While LDCs are weak in terms of economic power, their populations
far outnumber those of more developed nations. The weak economies result in
lower net spending on housing, thus increasing the severity of housing
problems.[^165]

#### 1. Brazil

Brazil is a country with vast natural resources and a growing population. In
fact, “[b]y 2015, Brazil's economy — which already surpasses that of Russia —
will be the sixth largest in the world.”[^166] Brazil's land is diverse and is
nearly the size of the continental United States. However, as in many
developing countries, there is a great disparity in wealth and property
ownership among Brazilian citizens. The United States Department of State
(U.S. State Department) reported that “[l]arge disparities in income
distribution continue to exist, with the poorest fifth of the population
earning only 2 percent of national income, while the richest tenth receive 51
percent.”[^167] This disparity in wealth has created a housing shortage that
was estimated to be at ten million units in 1992.[^168] In Brazil, forty-six
percent of the land is owned by wealthy landowners, who account for one
percent of the Brazilian population.[^169] According to the Brazilian
Institute for Geography and Statistics, just three percent of the land is
owned by the Brazilian rural poor, who make up fifty-three percent of the
country's population.[^170] Many of the landless are upset because large
tracts of land are going unused in Brazil.[^171] Not surprisingly, this
disparity in land ownership has led to squatting and subsequent violent
reactions by landowners. In reporting on this violence, the U.S. State
Department noted that “[t]he most serious human rights abuses continue[] to be
extrajudicial killings and torture. Justice is slow and often unreliable,
especially in rural areas where powerful landowners use violence to settle
land disputes.”[^172]

In Brazil, conflicts related to squatting occur most often “[w]here land title
is not clear and/or government programs provide incentives for
invasion.”[^173] A study commissioned by the National Science Foundation and
World Bank study found that violent clashes are often caused by sluggish
governmental policies and rising land values.[^174] The U.S. State Department,
noting the power of the landowners and the ineffectiveness of the government,
reported: “[i]n rural areas … landowners [have] often intimidated judges,
lawyers, and police with violence and threats of violence.”[^175] The report
points out that violence has intensified “because of the slow progress of the
Federal Government toward reaching its goal of granting land tenure
certifications to hundreds of thousands of landless families.”[^176]

It is a common characteristic of many LDCs to have uncertainty in title. Not
only does this uncertainly harm economic development, but, as in Brazil, it
often leads to violence and death. Brazilian governmental policies have
increased violence by placing incentives and subsidies for land development in
certain areas. Most of these incentive plans have been based upon development
of the Amazon Basin. Moreover, police and governmental officials have been
implicated in much of the violence against the squatters. On August 9, 1995,
nine squatters were killed when police opened fire on a squatters' camp.[^177]
Seven of the nine squatters killed “were shot point-blank in the face, neck,
chest, and back.”[^178] According to the Pastoral Land Commission, the battles
over land have “left 74 people dead.”[^179] A human rights group also
“attribute[s] 10 percent of that state's homicides to the police … [and]
speculates that the actual number may be higher since no suspects have been
found in one-third of these cases.”[^180] Supporting the peasants are groups
like the Landless Workers Movement that organized “controversial land
occupations to help dispossessed farm workers and those longing to escape from
the slums to establish small agricultural encampments on Brazil's vast tracts
of privately owned but idle land.”[^181] This squatting group has become
powerful as “[h]undreds of thousands of workers have become involved.”[^182]
The fact that “[n]early a half-million Brazilians have been resettled in this
manner” demonstrates the group's success.[^183] However, acquiring housing in
this manner involves great risk; the Unified Worker Central reports that “more
than 1,700 [workers] have been killed in the last decade” by “[t]hugs hired by
private landowners, the police, or the two together.”[^184]

In addition to violence, there are also critical collateral problems with
respect to property in Brazil. In the Brazilian rainforests, squatters and
squatters' camps have been linked to destruction of the forest. For instance,
occupants without property rights are unwilling to invest in “‘erosion
control, fertilizers, and irrigation.’”[^185] One squatter stated that “[w]e
don't have any machinery or fertilizers, so the only way to prepare the soil
is by burning [it].”[^186] These squatters, who are clearly in a difficult
situation, need the support of international organizations capable of helping
them secure viable farm land and educating them on environmentally friendly
farming techniques. Nevertheless, the environmental degradation caused by
insufficient property rights is not unique to Brazil, but plagues other LDCs
as well.[^187]

Brazil, a dynamic and growing country, needs guidance in decreasing the
terrible incidents of violence against squatters. For Brazil, it will not be
enough to simply mandate or support land titling procedures or to enact
Western property schemes. In light of the international “right to
housing”[^188] and other human rights agreements, other nations must provide
support as well as pressure to prevent further squatter tragedies.

#### 2. Malaysia

As a former British colony, Malaysia has a common law legal history. Like many
LDCs, Malaysia is besieged by squatting problems. In a recent Malaysian
census, “552,196 squatters had been identified … [and] most squatters
settlements were built on government land.”[^189] Squatters are very prevalent
in the Malaysian cities of Selangor, Kuala Lumpur, and Johor.[^190] In these
cities, costs of living are so high that even legitimately employed workers
are forced into squatting for survival.[^191] Furthermore, illegal immigration
represents a significant problem in Malaysia: “Perlis … [is] a major entry and
transit point for illegal workers, especially those from the Indian
sub-continent. Most head straight for the capital, Kuala Lumpur.”[^192] To
address the illegal immigrant problem the Malaysian parliament passed the
“Immigration Act (Amendment) 1996 … [under which] employers who hire illegal
workers can be fined … [and] those responsible for bringing them in [to the
country] can be fined … jailed and caned.”[^193]

The government has resorted to these harsher laws because, as Malaysian Deputy
Finance Minister Datuk Dr. Affifuddin Omar has reported, “studies show that
the inflow of foreign workers and their families not only cause[s] the
population density to rise in major towns but also affect[s] house [sic]
prices and rentals as well as cause[s] health problems.”[^194] Despite some of
the serious labor and housing problems, squatters in Malaysia do hold some
power. In Malaysia, “[t]he tolerance level for squatters has … been
traditionally high.”[^195] Atypical of most LDCs and perhaps attributable to
the squatters' power, Malaysia has taken affirmative steps to cure some of the
problems associated with squatters and their communities. Squatting safety is
one area in which Malaysian government officials have made significant
progress. In Kuala Lumpur, it is estimated that 226,000 squatters reside in
255 squatter settlements.[^196] To some degree, the government has accepted
their existence and decided to limit the safety risks that the squatters may
encounter. For example, “[t]he government is prepared to provide fire-fighting
equipment and training” to 150,000 squatters if they are willing to set up
“volunteer fire response units.”[^197] Malaysian government officials have
also made plans to limit the impact of waste and garbage on squatters'
areas.[^198] One government official stated that “rubbish dumping in squatter
areas has become a big issue… [Polluters,] including factory owners, [have
been] dumping toxic waste near squatter areas.[^199] Malaysian officials have
also sought to improve the lifestyles of squatters by providing them with a
sense of community. The government has moved towards “build[ing] community
halls in traditional and squatter villages … as they serve as a focal point
for community activities.”[^200] These centers would be used “for social
activities like meetings, gatherings, as public libraries, reading rooms and
kindergartens.”[^201] As evidence of the success of squatters in Malaysia, one
government official noted “the positive development in squatter villagers
[sic] to date especially the readiness of squatters to support development in
their area and development proposals squatter committees have sent him.”[^202]

The Malaysian government has accepted the reality that squatters and
squatters' movements are an integral part of their country. Instead of
fighting the squatters, Malaysian officials are taking real and logical steps
to assist the squatters: this type of partnership is a model that other LDCs
should emulate and follow.

#### 3. Philippines

The Philippines is a LDC that is rapidly growing in population. As in many
LDCs, there is a great disparity between the rich and the poor. The Philippine
government has started a program called “Philippines 2000” that aims “to
convert its agrarian-based, paternalistic economy into an industrial,
market-driven one.”[^203] Despite these lofty goals, poverty and homelessness
are prevalent throughout urban and rural areas in the Philippines. High rates
of homelessness have led to numerous incidents of squatting and subsequent
government action to remove squatters. According to the U.S. State Department,
the Philippine government has illegally “forced eviction of squatters” since
1992.[^204] The State Department's report indicates that “[h]uman rights NGO's
[nongovernmental organizations] have criticized government efforts to resettle
tenant farmers and urban squatters to make way for infrastructure, commercial,
and housing developments.”[^205] These industrial developments often collide
with squatters' housing and shanty towns. The State Department's report found
that governmental policies in the Philippines were ineffective because of the
“extensive poverty, the limited availability of affordable housing for the
urban poor, and squatter syndicates that exploit human misery and legal
safeguards for pecuniary or political ends.”[^206]

Manila, the capital of the Philippines, contains a very large concentration of
squatters. The National Housing Authority estimates that “[a]bout 3.5 million
people live in squatter colonies in and around Manila, representing 39 percent
of the capital's population.”[^207] Squatters armed with “rocks, darts, broken
bottles and gasoline bombs” have fought police in an attempt to “prevent
government wrecking crews from demolishing more than 500 shanties and
semi-concrete houses they had built on private property. Many of them have
been living in the area for more than a decade.”[^208] One particular area of
Manila has been a hot spot for squatter activity. “Smokey Mountain” is a huge
dump sight that houses thousands of squatters and has been described as “a
small mound [that] soon spread out of control, sprawling over a nine-acre area
and containing 2.2 billion tonnes [sic] of rotting rubbish.”[^209] Although
squatters and scavengers benefitted from the mound by “collecting bottles,
nails and copper wire for recycling … [and by obtaining] their rent-free
shanty houses,” there were serious dangers as demonstrated by the “[u]ntold
numbers of scavengers [who] died after falling into the flames… [and] [o]thers
[who] were run over by bulldozers or dust carts, or [who] succumbed to lung
diseases and other illnesses that were rife on the dump.”[^210] However, the
government has treated these squatters poorly as evidenced by its preparation
for last year's APEC [Asian Pacific Economic Cooperation] forum: “[h]undreds
of squatter shacks [were] bulldozed along the capital's major roads leading
from the international airport to the big hotels and convention sites.”[^211]
“Imelda Marcos, widow of former president Ferdinand Marcos, used to call [the
bulldozing] beautification … ”[^212] This “beautification” of Manila left “at
least 10,000 of the city's estimated 3 million people homeless … About 1,000
families were removed from a stretch of land reclaimed from Manila Bay, and
200 more families were left homeless when the bulldozers plowed though the
Paco slum.[^213] This strategy of “[r]elocating squatters to distant
relocation camps [didn't] work; the people return[ed] since there [was] no
work there.”[^214]

The international community should not support the mistreatment of squatters
by allowing countries like the Philippines to host prestigious summits such as
APEC. Additionally, the world community can provide practical and effective
assistance to help LDCs with housing problems by facilitating the
establishment of partnerships between squatters and governments. However, this
assistance must be contingent upon a government's willingness to adhere to
internationally recognized values and human rights.

## V. Conclusion

In examining why squatters are treated so differently in different parts of
the world, it is clear that the rights of squatters are directly linked to the
amount of support given by their communities. In Europe, squatters and
squatters' movements are generally well supported by the public; thus,
squatters in Europe have had more success. As for squatters' movements in the
United States, it might simply be that their time has not come. European
nations in the twentieth century have been more socially progressive and more
advanced in environmental areas. The United States may be following in their
path. The fate of squatters in LDCs, on the other hand, depends on the
willingness of governments to accept and foster partnerships with squatters
and squatters' communities. Without such relationships, the tension between
property rights and those attempting to survive often results in tragedy.

Utilitarianism and efficiency are proper models for the establishment and
maintenance of property laws. Despite the desire for wealth and profit, the
efficient use of property benefits all of society. Property that stands idle
or unused simply acts as an anchor on the ultimate progress of society.
Governments should put to use unused public lands by creating new housing and
settlements. Thus, a mere accounting of governmental resources, adverse
possession laws, and attitudes towards squatters, the homeless, and
homesteaders may itself lead to the alleviation of homelessness.

Governments should also reform adverse possession laws to place heavier
burdens on private land owners to monitor and preserve their land. Long
statutes of limitations are simply anachronistic. Statutes of limitations in
adverse possession laws should be uniformly shortened to coincide with the
increased scarcity of property and housing. Likewise, governments worldwide
should strive for greater certainty and clarity with respect to real property
rights. Indeed, governments should consider such reforms to be their duty and
should take action to reduce violence caused by unclear property rights.

As a matter of policy, governments and municipalities should be held
accountable for vacant property. If this burden is too great, they should
allow squatters and homesteaders to fill their resource gaps. Instead of
antagonizing squatters, governments should strive to support squatters'
efforts and should provide safe solutions by forming community partnerships.
Moreover, governments must establish minimum support for the health, safety,
and welfare of squatter residences and settlements. Homesteading should be
encouraged. This type of squatting provides homeless people with a sense of
purpose and lowers the costs for governments in providing housing.

This note has illuminated existing property laws, policies, and solutions that
serve both legitimate property interests and the interests of society at
large, while serving the general goals of equity and efficiency. Nonetheless,
the potential for realizing these goals globally would be even greater if more
governments engaged in the aforementioned activities and supported squatting
efforts instead of criminalizing these actions. All squatters should not be
viewed as opportunistic criminals. Instead, squatters should be respected as
citizens who choose not to wait for governmental solutions, but choose
self-help and attempt to remedy to their problems independently.

[^1]: C. Abbrams, *Man's Struggle for Shelter in an Urbanizing World* 12
    (1964), reprinted in Cutris J. Berger, *Land Ownership and Use*, p. 513
    (3rd ed. 1983).

[^2]: U.S. Bureau of Census (visited Nov. 17, 1997)
    <[http://www.census.gov/cgi-bin/ipc/popclockw](http://www.census.gov/cgi-bin/ipc/popclockw)>

[^3]: *Id.* The United Nations' *World Population Prospects 1990* confirms
    this forecast; it predicts the world population to approach 8.5 billion
    persons by the year 2025. *Stanley Johnson, World Population — Turning the
    Tide*, p. 235 (1994).

[^4]: Justice R. Sachar, *Working Paper on Promoting the Realization of the
    Right to Adequate Housing*, at 4-11, U.N. Doc. EICN.4/sub.2/1992115
    (visited Oct. 8, 1997)
    <[http://www.undp.org/unlhabitat/presskit/dpil778e.htm](http://www.undp.org/unlhabitat/presskit/dpil778e.htm)>
    [hereinafter *Realization*]. The Global Report on Human Settlements released
    in March 1996 estimates that “500 million urban dwellers are homeless or
    live in inadequate housing.” *Id.* The World Health Organization estimates
    that the number of homeless children ranges from 10 million to 100
    million, with the possibility that 20 million live in industrialized
    nations, 40 million in Latin American nations, 30 million in Asia, and 10
    million in Africa. Robin Wright, *Gimme Shelter: The Plight of the
    Homeless in Lands of Plenty in Advanced Nations, the ‘New Poverty’ Sends
    More and More People into the Street*. LA TIMES Oct 4, 1994. Available in
    1994 WL 2351607.

[^5]: The National Coalition for the Homeless found that it is not easy to
    accurately count the number of homeless persons in the United States
    because: “1) people who lack permanent addresses are not easily counted;
    2) definitions of homelessness vary from study to study; and 3) different
    methodologies for counting homeless people yield significantly different
    results.” The National Coalition for the Homeless (visited Oct. 8, 1997)
    <[http://nch.ari.net/numbers.html](http://nch.ari.net/numbers.html)>.
    Furthermore, one source claims that “[t]he number who are homeless for at
    least one night during the year is probably over three million.” Charles
    Froloff, *54 Ways You Can Help the Homeless* (visited Oct. 8, 1997)
    <[http://www.earthsystems.org/ways](http://www.earthsystems.org/ways)>.

[^6]: The necessity for adequate housing is described in various international
    documents that include: “the Universal Declaration of Human Rights
    (article 25), the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural
    Rights (article 11), the International Convention on the Elimination of
    all Forms of Racial Discrimination (article 5), the Convention on the
    Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women (article 14)…
    [and] the Convention on the Rights of the Child (article 27).” United
    Nations Department of Public Information, *Is There a Right to Housing?*
    (visited Oct. 8, 1997)
    <[http://www.undp.org/un/habitat/presskit/dpil778e.htm](http://www.undp.org/un/habitat/presskit/dpil778e.htm)>.

[^7]: Matthew C. R. Craven, *The International Covenant on Economic, Social, A
    Perspective on Its Development* 333 (1995). The U.N. and Cultural Rights:
    Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights did not oblige Member
    States to end homelessness immediately, but simply to take steps to
    decrease its prevalence. *Realization*, *supra* note 4.

[^8]: For a general discussion of rights of the homeless in the United States,
    see David Rosendorf, Note, *Homelessness and the Uses of Theory: An
    Analysis of Economic and Personality Theories of Property in the Context
    of Voting Rights and Squatting Rights*, 45 U. MIAMI 701 (1990)
    [hereinafter *Rosendorf*].

[^9]: *Black's Law Dictionary*, p. 1403 (6th ed. 1990). There are many
    different types of squatters:

    > “The *owner squatter* owns his shack, though not the land; … The
    > *squatter tenant* is in the poorest class, does not own or build a
    > shack, but pays rent to another squatter … The *squatter holdover* is a
    > former tenant who has ceased paying rent and whom the landlord fears to
    > evict. The *squatter landlord* is usually a squatter of long standing
    > who has rooms or huts to rent, often at exorbitant profit. The
    > *speculator squatter* is usually a professional to whom squatting is a
    > sound business venture … The *store squatter* or occupational squatter
    > establishes his small lockup store on land he does not own, and he may
    > do a thriving business without paying rent or taxes … The
    > *semi-squatter* has surreptitiously built his hut on private land and
    > subsequently come to terms with the owner. … The *floating squatter*
    > lives in an old hulk or junk which is floated or sailed into the city's
    > harbor… The *squatter 'cooperator'* is part of the group that shares the
    > common foothold and protects it against intruders, public and private.”
    >
    > — Abrams, *supra* note 1, at p. 515.

[^10]: *Realization*, *supra* note 4. See also *The Realization of Economic,
    Social and Cultural Rights: The Right to Adequate Housing* (2d Progress
    Report by Mr. Rajindar Sachar, Special Rapporteur), U.N. Commission on
    Human Rights (Sub-Commission on Prevention of Discrimination and
    Protection of Minorities), 46th Sess., Provisional Agenda Item 8, U.N.
    Doc. E/CN.4.Sub.2/1994/20 (visited Oct. 8, 1997)
    <[http://www.undp.org/unlhabitat/rights/s2-94-20.html](http://www.undp.org/unlhabitat/rights/s2-94-20.html)>
    [hereinafter *The Right to Adequate Housing*].

[^11]: *The Right to Adequate Housing*, *supra* note 10.

[^12]: United Nations Department of Public Information, *supra* note 6.

[^13]: *Black's Law Dictionary*, *supra* note 9, at p. 53. The theory of
    property use by prescription is also useful in certain property disputes.
    Prescription in real property law is “[t]he name given to a mode of
    acquiring title to incorporeal hereditaments by immemorial or
    long-continued enjoyment.” *Id.* at p. 1183. The difference between
    prescription and adverse possession is that "[p]rescription is the term
    usually applied to incorporeal hereditaments, while ‘adverse possession’
    is applied to lands.” Id. Incorporeal hereditaments are “[a]nything, the
    subject of property, which is inheritable and not tangible or visible.”
    *Id.* at p. 726.

[^14]: See generally, *Adverse Possession of Landlord as Affected by Tenant's
    Recognition of Title of Third Person*, p. 38 A.L.R.2d 826 (1995). Adverse
    possession “promote[s] the universality requirement [of property].” Howard
    Gensler, *Property As An Optimal Economic Foundation*, 35 WashBurn L. J.
    p, 50, 55 (1995). Generally, “universality means that all valuable, scarce
    resources must be owned by someone.” *Id.* at p. 51.

[^15]: Property rights have always been different when held by the government.
    Section 37 of the Code Hammurabi states, with respect to the real property
    of a member of the government: “[i]f a man purchase the field or garden or
    house of an officer, constable or tax-gatherer, his deed-tablet shall be
    broken (canceled) and he shall forfeit his money and he shall return the
    field, garden or house to its owner.” *The Code of Hammurabi, King of
    Babylon* p. 23 (Robert Francis Harper trans., Univ. of Chicago Press
    1904). In England, the legal maxim “nullum tempus occurit regis (no times
    runs against the king) barred the running of the statute of limitations
    against the state.” Jesse Dukemineir & James E. Krier, *Property* p. 112
    (1981). In the United States, several states do allow adverse possession
    to run against the state. See generally *Thompson on Real Property* § 87
    (David A. Thomas ed., 1994) [hereinafter *Thompsson*].

[^16]: See *infra* Parts IV.E.2 and IV.F.1.

[^17]: *Dukeminier & Krier*, *supra* note 15, at p. 100.

[^18]: Section 44 regarding the waste of land states: “If a man rent an
    unreclaimed field for three years to develop it, and neglect it and do not
    develop the field, in the fourth year he shall break up the field with
    hoes, he shall hoe and harrow it and he shall return it to the owner of
    the field and shall measure out ten GUR of grain per ten GAN.” *The Code
    of Hammurabi*, *supra* note 15, at p. 27. Section 60 rewards long economic
    development: “If a man give a field to a gardener to plant as an orchard
    and the gardener plant the orchard and care for the orchard four years, in
    the fifth year the owner of the orchard and the gardener shall share
    equally: the owner of the orchard shall mark off his portion and take it."
    *Id.* at p. 33. Maximizing the gardener's plot of land, section 61 states:
    “If the gardener do not plant the whole field, but leave a space waste,
    they shall assign the waste space to his portion.” *Id.*

[^19]: Some scholars debate the value of land titling. See generally Steven E.
    Hendrix, *Myths of Property Rights*, p. 12 *Ariz. J. Int'l & Comp. L.* p.
    183 (1995). Hendrix finds that, depending on complex conditions, land
    titling may either improve or slow economic development in LDCs. *Id.*

[^20]: For a general discussion of property rights in the civil-law tradition,
    see infra Part IV.B-D. For further discussion of Roman law and its
    connection with “a vector of the morals of the ‘materialistic world
    order,’” see generally James Whitman, *The Moral Menace of Roman Law and
    the Making of Commerce: Some Dutch Evidence*, p. 105 *Yale L.J.* p. 1841,
    1842 (1996).

[^21]: Emilie de Laveleye, *Primitive Property* p. 6 (G. R. L. Marriott
    trans., 1878).

[^22]: Andrew Lintott, *Judicial Reform and Land Reform in the Roman Republic*
    p. 34 (1992).

[^23]: John Christman, *The Myth of Property* p. 17 (1994). These absolute
    rights are similar to the rights that would later re-assert themselves in
    Europe and eventually in the United States. *Id.*

[^24]: *Id.*

[^25]: *Lintott*, *supra* note 22, at p. 36.

[^26]: See *infra* Part III for a discussion of utilitarianism and land use
    theory.

[^27]: *De Laveleye*, *supra* note 21, at p. 138.

[^28]: *Lintott*, *supra* note 22, at p. 35.

[^29]: *Id.*

[^30]: See *infra* Part III for a discussion of utility and economic rights.

[^31]: Jacob H. Beekhuis, *Civil Law*, in VI *International Encyclopedia of
    Comparative Law*, ch. 2 ‘Structural Variations in Property Law’, at p. 4
    (1981). For a detailed survey of European legal history, see Manlio
    Bellomo, *The Common Legal Past of Europe: 1000–1800* (1995).

[^32]: *Christman*, *supra* note 23, at p. 10.

[^33]: *Thompson*, *supra* note 15, at p. 70. See also Olan Lowery, *Adverse
    Possession*, ch. 87 (1994).

[^34]: Philip James, *Introduction to English Law*, p. 420 (12th ed. 1989).
    For an interesting comparison to Scotland, see *The Civil Law Tradition in
    Scotland* (Robin Evans-Jones ed., 1995). In particular, chapter eight by
    David Johnston compares Scottish and Roman law.

[^35]: William Ackerman, *Outlaws of the Past: A Western Perspective on
    Prescription and Adverse Possession*, p. 31. Land & Water p. 79, 81
    (1996).

[^36]: *James*, *supra* note 34, at p. 422. As payment for their lands, these
    landholders supported the King in his foreign military quests or in
    defending against the hostile Scotsmen from the North. *Id.*

[^37]: *Thompson*, *supra* note 15, at p. 71.

[^38]: *James*, *supra* note 34, at p. 423.

[^39]: *Dukeminier & Krier*, *supra* note 15, at p. 359.

[^40]: Paschal Larkin, *Property in the Eighteenth Century* p. 64 (1969)
    (quoting John Locke, *Letters Concerning Toleration* p. 177).

[^41]: *Id.* at p. 65.

[^42]: *Christman*, *supra* note 23, at p. 18.

[^43]: Charles Harr & Lonnie Liebman, *Property and Law* p. 81 (2d ed. 1985).
    One author identifies the date as 1184 instead of 1189, explaining that
    the date “may have varied at the king's pleasure.” *Thompson*, *supra*
    note 15, at p. 72 n. 20. *Black's Law Dictionary*. defines seisin as
    “[p]ossession of real property under claim of freehold estate. The
    completion of the feudal investiture, by which the tenant was admitted
    into the feud, and performed the rights of homage and fealty.” *Black's
    Law Dictionary*, *supra* note 9, at p. 1358.

[^44]: 21 Jac. 1, c. 16, §§ 1, 2. For a history of adverse possession in the
    United States, see *infra* Part II.D. For the current state of adverse
    possession law in the United States, see *infra* Part IV.E.

[^45]: *Berger*, *supra* note 1, at p. 499.

[^46]: *Dukeminier & Krier*, *supra* note 15, at p. 100.

[^47]: *Berger*, *supra* note 1, at p. 499.

[^48]: *Harr & Liebman*, *supra* note 43, at p. 81.

[^49]: *Thompson*, *supra* note 15, at p. 81.

[^50]: John Henry Merrman, *The Civil Law Tradition*, p. 25 (1969).

[^51]: *Id.* at p. 100.

[^52]: *Beekhuis*, *supra* note 31, at p. 10.

[^53]: *Thompson*, *supra* note 15, at p. 69.

[^54]: *Berger*, *supra* note 1, at p. 500.

[^55]: 7 R. Powell, *Real Property* p. 1012 (P. Rohan ed., 1977) reprinted in
    *Dukeminier & Krier*, *supra* note 15, at p. 83.

[^56]: Ackerman, *supra* note 35, at p. 83 (citing Patton's Lessee v. Easton,
    14 U.S. 474 (1816)).

[^57]: 21 U.S. (8 Wheat.) 543 (1823).

[^58]: *Id.* at p. 587–88.

[^59]: Martin Chanock, ‘Paradigms, Policies and Property: A Review of the
    Customary Law of Land Tenure’, in *Law in Colonial Africa* p. 61 (Kristin
    Mann & Richard Roberts eds., 1991). An interesting historical event in the
    movement away from colonialism was the “Mau Mau Emergency” in Kenya. See
    generally David W Throup, *Economic 7 Social Origins of Mau Mau 1945–53
    (1990)*. In 1949, a local farmer described the influx of squatters into
    Kenya at the time:

    > “[S]quatter labour is pouring into the forest reserve, where the
    > conditions are probably so attractive as to make this a squatters'
    > paradise, and a haven of refuge. Land; land; land; nice fresh virgin
    > land, is their cry; little or no work from their bibis [wives]; sheep
    > filling their bellies with good green luscious grass; firewood quite
    > handy; pombe [beer] brewing galore — who will visit us in the forest at
    > night… Utopia has been discovered …”

    *Id.* at p. 91 (quoting KNA Lab 9/320, The Resident Labourers' Ordinance:
    Aberdare District Council 1944–51, Major L.B.L. Hughes to DC Naivasha,
    Mar. 16, 1949).

    > “The Mau Mau movement was an alliance between three groups… : the urban
    > unemployed and destitute, the dispossessed squatters from the White
    > Highlands and the tenants and members of the junior clans in the Kikuyu
    > reserves. The revolt was a dominating factor in convincing the
    > conservative [English] imperial government that the cost of repression
    > in the African colonies was not worth the troops and resources.”

    *Id.* at back cover. Similar colonial revolts plagued other European
    powers whose resources were sapped by World War II: France in Vietnam,
    Belgium in Congo, and Great Britain in Kenya. See generally, Frank Furedi,
    *The Mau Mau War in Perspective* (1989). Furedi notes that the English
    attempted to present the squatters' movement “as a criminal organization.
    The colonial government went to great lengths to portray Mau Mau as an
    irrational force of evil, dominated by bestial impulses and influenced by
    world communism.” Id. at p. 3–4. The Mau Mau movement “expressed the
    irreconcilable nature of social tensions. Its destruction was the
    pre-condition for the evolution of a more acceptible reforming nationalist
    movement and the consummation of the process of decolonization.” *Id.* at
    p. 7.

[^60]: *Christman*, *supra* note 32, at p. 101.

[^61]: *Id.*

[^62]: *Chanock*, *supra* note 59, at p. 62.

[^63]: *Christman*, *supra* note 23, at p. 102. Similarly, one author contends
    that “[i]n order for an economy to reach its full potential, that is, to
    achieve an optimal level of production, there are three basic features
    which its system of property rights must have: universality, exclusivity,
    and transferability.” Gensler, *supra* note 14, at 51.

[^64]: *Gensler*, *supra* note 14, at p. 51.

[^65]: H. Demsetz, ‘Toward a Theory of Property Rights’, in *The Economics of
    Property Rights* p. 31 (Eirik G. Furubotn & Svetozar Pejovich eds., 1974).
    See generally Terry L. Anderson & P. J. Hill, *The Evolution of Property
    Rights: A Study of the American West*, 18 J.L. & ECON. 163 (1975)
    (additional economic information on property rights).

[^66]: See *infra* Part IV.F (property rights in LDCs).

[^67]: *Demsetz*, *supra* note 66, at p. 32.

[^68]: *The Right to Adequate Housing*, *supra* note 10, p. 35. Despite this
    announcement, there are a number of objections to squatting: 1) it
    violates property rights; 2) it subjects the participants to the risk of
    arrest; 3) it involves significant labor and expense to rehabilitate the
    housing, which invariably is in poor physical condition; 4) squatters gain
    shelter for themselves at the expense of the hundreds of thousands on
    waiting lists for public housing; and 5) squatting is likely to antagonize
    neighborhood residents who object to the presence of squatters. Eric
    Hirsch & Peter Wood, *Squatting in New York City: Justification and
    Strategy*, 16 N.Y.U. REV. L. & Soc. CHANGE 605, 605 (1987).

[^69]: *Dukeminier & Kreir*, *supra* note 15, at p. 100. After World War II,
    there was a massive squatting movement in London after the government
    promised “homes fit for heroes,” but housing was lacking. Greg Neale, ‘50
    Years On: a Squat Fit for Heroes’, *Sunday Telegraph* (London), Apr. 28,
    1996, available in 1996 WL 3945816.

[^70]: *Neale*, *supra* note 70. In 1992, there were 764,000 empty properties
    in Great Britain. Rachel Kelly, ‘Squatters Put Down Roots in Campaign to
    Reclaim Derelict Flats’, *Times* (London), Aug. 7, 1992, available in 1992
    WL 10896061. In 1995, “[a]ccording to the Department of the Environment,
    there [were] an estimated 864,000 empty homes in Britain. The Advisory
    Service for Squatters estimate[d] that 17,000 of [those homes] contain[ed]
    squatters.” Ian Hunter, ‘Streetwise Moves to Outsmart Squatters’, GUARDIAN
    (London), Mar. 26, 1995, available in 1995 WL 7590927.

[^71]: *Dukeminier & Krier*, *supra* note 15, at p. 100.

[^72]: *Id.* at p. 101. As evidence of this sympathy for squatting in England,
    the villagers of Pulham St. Mary at one time supported four squatters who
    occupied a 27-room mansion and called them “delightful young people.” Jo
    Knowsley, ‘Squatters Defy Court Orderto Vacate Mansion’, *Sunday
    Telegraph* (London), Mar. 24, 1996, available in 1996 WL 3937509. However,
    this relationship deteriorated over a two year period as the squatters
    continued to host “a series of rave parties [that] … kept [the villagers]
    awake until dawn.” *Id.*

[^73]: *Dukeminier & Krier*, *supra* note 15, at p. 100, 101. This squatting
    is not unlike what is currently happening in California. See *infra* Part
    IV.E.2.

[^74]: *James*, *supra* note 34, at p. 474.

[^75]: These agencies are non-profit organizations, unlike a similar squatting
    agency in California that charges its customers monthly rent. See infra
    Part IV.E.2. This agency is called the Advisory Service for Squatters
    (ASS) and its goals are to provide legal and practical advice to
    squatters, those interested in squatting, and local squatting groups. It
    also produces the “Squatters' Handbook” — a guide to many of the problems
    that may arise in connection with squatting. Resource Information Service,
    *Homelessness in the U.K.* (visited Oct. 10, 1997)
    <[http://www.ris.org.uk/](http://www.ris.org.uk/)>.

[^76]: Michael Fleet & Trevor Fishlock, ‘I'm Your New Estate Agent’, *Daily
    Telegraph* (London), Feb. 27, 1996, available in 1996 WL 3931101.

[^77]: Katherine Bowen, ‘Letter to the Editor, The Worst Kind of Squatter‘,
    *Daily Telegraph* (London), June 13, 1993, available in 1993 WL 10948348.

[^78]: Lynne Wallis, ‘Taking Stock as Empty Shops Fall to Commercial
    Squatters’, *Daily Telegraph* (London), June 28, 1993, available in 1993
    WL 10951926.

[^79]: Steven Ward, ‘Squatters Face Six Months' Jail’, *Independent* (London),
    Aug. 24, 1995, available in 1995 WL 9804810.

[^80]: *Wright*, *supra* note 4. There are specific procedural steps that an
    unintentionally homeless person must go through to receive housing. R. v.
    London Borough of Ealing *Exparte* Denny, CO/390/93 (Q.B. 1993). First the
    person must “appl[y] to the local authority for permanent accommodation.”
    *Id.* Next, “[e]ach successful applicant for housing is offered by his
    local authority a property which is vacant, available for occupation and
    suitable in terms of size, location, facilities, etc.” *Id.* If the person
    rejects this housing offer, the authority may offer another property.
    *Id.* Often a person will accept a squatted property and “arrangements and
    likely time scale for ejecting the squatters and securing vacant
    possession is discussed with the homeless person…” *Id.* Then the homeless
    person is given tenancy in the property, is protected, and given
    “assistance of the police under § 7 of the Criminal Law Act 1977.” *Id.*
    This system certainly has some merit. If abandoned viable property is kept
    in registries, this could be an effective and low cost remedy to some of
    the world's homelessness.

[^81]: *Ward*, *supra* note 80.

[^82]: ‘Off Beat: The Police; Great Britain's Criminal Justice Act Gives More
    Power to Police Officers in Cases of Trespassing and Squatting, But Police
    Are Reluctant to Make Arrests Because They Are Not Compensated for the
    Work’, *Economist*, (UK), Nov. 26, 1994, available in 1994 WL 12754630
    [hereinafter *Off Beat*].

[^83]: *Ward*, *supra* note 80.

[^84]: *Id.*

[^85]: *Off Beat*, *supra* note 83.

[^86]: Penal Affairs Consortium, *Squatters, Travelers, Ravers, Protesters and
    the Criminal Law* (visited Oct. 2, 1996)
    <[http://www.penlex.org.uk/pacsquat.html](http://www.penlex.org.uk/pacsquat.html)>.

[^87]: *Letting Facts: Squatters and the County Court (Amendment No. 2) Rules
    1995*, (visited Oct. 2, 1996)
    <[http://www.letlink.co.uk/lfactsl4.html](http://www.letlink.co.uk/lfactsl4.html)>.

[^88]: *Id.*

[^89]: Michael Fleet, ‘Let the Trumpton Squatters Stay‘, *Daily Telegraph*
    (London), July 8, 1996, available in 1996 WL 3963350. Despite the apparent
    success of these squatters, others have faced severe problems, such as
    difficulties in obtaining electricity. In *Woodcock v. South W. Elec.
    Bd.*, the court held that the defendants were not obligated to provide the
    plaintiffs with electricity. 2 All E.R. 545 (Q.B. 1975). In that case,
    student squatters sued under an 1899 law that requires that electricity be
    given to “the owner or occupier of any premises.” *Id.* In *R. v.
    McCreadie*, another case involving electricity, the court upheld the
    conviction of two squatters, one of whom told the police he was renting
    the shop from the owner, that he did not know that the electricity was
    being used illegally and that payment was nothing to do with him.” 96
    Crim. App. 143 (1992).

[^90]: *Fleet*, *supra* note 90.

[^91]: *Id.*

[^92]: *James*, *supra* note 34, at p. 480.

[^93]: *Mount Carmel Inv. Ltd. v. Peter Thurlow Ltd.*, 3 All E.R. 129 (C.A.
    1988). This tacking without privity is not allowed in most jurisdictions
    in the United States, where clear privity between transferors of adverse
    possession claims is required. “Tacking occurs whenever the successive
    occupiers are said to be in ‘privity of estate.’ Privity of estate is a
    term that recurs often … [P]rivity would be satisfied if the relationship
    between the first and second occupier were: grantor-grantee,
    landlord-tenant; testator-devisee; decedent-heir; at mortgagor-mortgagee.”
    *Berger*, *supra* note 1, p. 506.

[^94]: ‘Couple Cash in on Sale of a Squat’, *Times* (London), July 9, 1996
    available in 1996 WL 6505728.

[^95]: Wright, *supra* note 4.

[^96]: § 900 BGB I, availablein *The German Civil Code* p. 168 (Simon L. Goren
    trans., 1994). This statute is not absolute and the limitation of claims
    on lands has caused some problems in Germany, as “Germany's reunification
    treaty allowed for the return of property seized by the Nazis up until
    1945, and the Communist from 1948 onwards, but not for the restitution of
    land expropriated by the Soviet occupation of 1945–1948. Six years on, the
    former owners are still fighting furiously for recognition.” George
    Monbiot, ‘A Man's Home is Someone Else's Castle’, *Guardian* (London),
    July 18, 1996, available in 1996 WL 4034575.

[^97]: Stephen Kinzer, ‘‘Anarchist’ Squatters Win the Right to a Mortgage[;]
    Hamburg Has Given Up Trying to Evict a Gang of Residents Who Were Seen as
    a Potential Threat to Tourism’, *Guardian* (London), Jan. 6, 1996,
    available in 1996 WL 4003442.

[^98]: *Id.*

[^99]: *Id.*

[^100]: *Id.*

[^101]: See *infra* Part IV.E. 1 (conflict between the government and
    squatters in New York City).

[^102]: *Kinzer*, *supra* note 98.

[^103]: *Id.*

[^104]: Preben Stuer Lauridsen, ‘Introductory Review of the Links between Law
    and Jurisprudence in Scandinavia’, in *Danish Law, A General Survey*, p.
    9, 10 (Hans Gammeltoft-Hansen et al. eds., 1982).

[^105]: Jesper Berning, ‘Property Law’, in *Danish Law: A General Survey*,
    *supra* note 105, at p. 186 (emphasis in original). See also ‘supra’ note
    13 (general definitions of prescription).

[^106]: *Id.*

[^107]: *Id.*

[^108]: *Id.*

[^109]: ‘Squatting It Out’, *Economist* (UK), Apr. 1, 1978, at p. 44,
    available in *Lexis*, World Lib., *Allnws* File.

[^110]: *All Things Considered: Free City of Christiania Changing After 25
    Years* (National Public Radio broadcast, Sept. 26, 1996), available in
    1996 WL 12726671.

[^111]: *Id.*

[^112]: *Id.*

[^113]: ‘Dutch City Fights to Evict 30 British Squatters’, *Evening Standard*
    (UK), Jan. 24, 1995, at p. 16.

[^114]: ‘Dutch Police Arrest 139 in Clean-up of Squatted Building’, *Reuter
    Lib. Rep.* (Amsterdam), May 27, 1990.

[^115]: Catherine Trevison, ‘Decadence or Tolerance?’, *Tennessean*
    (Nashville, Tenn.), June 23, 1996, available in 1996 WL 10355456.

[^116]: W.M. Kleijn, ‘Property Law’, in *Introduction to Dutch Law For Foreign
    Lawyers* p. 63 (J. M. J. Chorus et al. eds., 2d rev. ed. 1993).

[^117]: *Id.* at p. 83. Also interesting in the Dutch property system is that
    “[s]ince 1951 the Dutch Code recognizes community property in apartment
    buildings …” *Id.* at p. 72. This system allows separate co-ownership of
    the building. *Id.*

[^118]: *Trevison*, *supra* note 116.

[^119]: Freedom Press, *A Visit to Amsterdam* (visited Oct. 2, 1996)
    <[http://www.lglobal.com/TAO/Freedom/ams.html](http://www.lglobal.com/TAO/Freedom/ams.html)>.

[^120]: *Id.*

[^121]: ‘Holland; Swat the squatters’, *Economist* (UK), Mar. 28, 1981, at p.
    34.

[^122]: *Id.* This criminal code is very similar to the anti-squatting acts
    passed in Great Britain. See generally *supra* text and accompanying notes
    82–85.

[^123]: See generally *Cal. Civ. Proc. Code.* §§ 317–321 (1996); *Idaho Code
    Ann.* § 5–203 (1881); *Mont. Code Ann.* § 70–19–401 (1975); *Iowa Code
    Ann.* § 614.31 (West 1969).

[^124]: N.Y. *Real Property Actions and Proceeding Law* §§ 501–551 (McKinney
    1997) (ten year statute of limitations).

[^125]: 106 N.E.2d p. 28 (N.Y. 1952).

[^126]: *Id.* at p. 29.

[^127]: 168 A.D.2d p. 881 (N.Y. App. Div. 1990).

[^128]: *Id.* at p. 883.

[^129]: Homesteading is an excellent solution to the problem of homelessness,
    as it offers a win-win solution with municipalities saving money while at
    the same time reducing the amount of homeless. For an interesting
    illustration of squatting and the underground homeless in New York City,
    see Margaret Morton, *The Tunnel: The Underground Homeless of New York
    City* (1995). This book describes some of the many homeless who have
    established a residence on abandoned railroad tracks. According to one
    squatter:

    > “ I don't ascribe any mystical thing to [living underground]. It's just
    > free. Not about a monetary free thing — but I feel free here. I'm not
    > constricted by people crowding me like over there where everybody's in a
    > matchbox. You could hear through the wall. Where's your privacy? Over
    > here there's privacy and spaciousness. I feel comfortable, and this is
    > my home.”

    *Id.* at p. 72.

[^130]: *Adverse Possession* (visited Nov. 30, 1997)
    <[http://www.escape.com/spyder/squat/adverse.html](http://www.escape.com/spyder/squat/adverse.html)>.

[^131]: *All Things Considered: East Village Squatters Win First Round Against
    City Segment* (National Public Radio broadcast, Nov. 9, 1995), available
    in 1995 WL 9892520. In regards to the contribution of the squatters, the
    petitioner's complaint in *East 13^th^ St. Homesteaders' Coalition v. New
    York City Dep't of Hous. Preservation and Dev.* states that the
    “Petitioners here have dedicated themselves to the long-term
    rehabilitation of abandoned housing stock, and have labored for more than
    ten years to make comfortable, safe homes for homeless and low-income
    families from the neighborhood.” ‘Squatter Legal Petition’, *East 13^th^
    St. Homesteaders' Coalition v. New York City Dept. of Hous. Preservation &
    Dev.*, para. 23 (visited Oct. 10, 1997)
    <[http://www.escape.com/spyder/squat/legal1.html](http://www.escape.com/spyder/squat/legal1.html)>
    [hereinafter *Bukowski Petition*].

[^132]: Sarah Ferguson, ‘You Can't Go Home Again: Inside the City's Siege of
    the 13^th^ Street Squats’, *Village Voice* (New York), June 13, 1995,
    available in 1995 WL 10286507 [hereinafter Ferguson, *You Can't Go Home
    Again*]. Many of the 13^th^ Street squatters were charged with criminal
    trespass, which is a violation of 140.10 of the New York State Penal Code.
    This provision states: “A person is guilty of criminal trespass in the
    third degree when he knowingly enters or remains unlawfully in a building
    or upon real property: (a) which is fenced or otherwise enclosed in a
    manner designed to exclude intruders … Criminal trespass in the third
    degree is a class B misdemeanor.” N.Y. *Criminal Trespass in the Third
    Degree* § 140.10 (McKinney 1997). The squatters were charged for
    trespassing in 1983 despite a three year statute of limitation and no
    formal notices of removal or trespass except for two eviction efforts.
    Bukowski Petition, supra note 132, paras. 42–50.

[^133]: Ferguson, *You Can't Go Home Again*, *supra* note 133.

[^134]: For example, in North Carolina the statute of limitations for normal
    adversepossession is twenty years. *N.C. Gen. Stat.* §§ 1-40 (1996).
    However, adverse possession against North Carolina has a thirty-year
    statute of limitations or a twenty-one year statute of limitation against
    the state with color of title. 1d. §§ 1-35. Likewise, South Dakota's
    statute of limitations is normally twenty years (*S.D. Codified Laws* §§
    15–3–1, 2, 3, 7, 10 (Michie 1997)); however, the statute of limitations
    against the state doubles to forty years. Id. § 15–3–14. Finally,
    Wisconsin normally has a twenty-year statute of limitations (*Wis. Stat.
    Ann.* § 893.25 (West 1995–1996)), and the statute of limitations against
    state property is also twenty years. *Id.*

[^135]: 609 N.Y.S.2d p. 554, 555 (N.Y. Civ. Ct. 1994).

[^136]: 916 F. Supp. 214 (E.D.N.Y. 1996).

[^137]: Sarah Ferguson, ‘Under Siege: Can the East Village Survive Another
    Purge?’, *Village Voice* (New York), Aug. 27, 1996, available in 1996 WL
    11169869.

[^138]: Walls, 916 F. Supp. at p. 224.

[^139]: *All Things Considered: East Village Squatters Win First Round Against
    City Segment*, *supra* note 132.

[^140]: *East 13^th^ St. Homesteaders' Coalition v. New York City Dep't of
    Hous. Preservation and Dev.*, 230 A.D.2d 622 (N.Y. App. Div. 1996).

[^141]: Ferguson, *You Can't Go Home Again*, *supra* note 133.

[^142]: ‘White-Collar Squatters: Deeds Done Dirt Cheap’, *Village Voice* (New
    York), Aug. 1, 1995, available in 1995 WL 10285089.

[^143]: *Adverse Possession*, *supra* note 131.

[^144]: Bukowski Petition, *supra* note 132, para. 5.

[^145]: See generally *Hirsch & Wood*, *supra* note 69, at p. 605.

[^146]: *Id.* at p. 613–14.

[^147]: *Id.* at p. 617.

[^148]: *Id.* at p. 606.

[^149]: This is not to say that there are not serious urban squatting problems
    in California. With many military base closures in California there may be
    a new squatting wave. In San Francisco, “twelve squatters took over two
    Presidio apartments for a Christmas day sit-in to call attention to the
    need for housing for the homeless.” ‘Presidio Squatters Charged’,
    *Sacramento Bee*, Dec. 27. 1996, available in 1996 WL 14034524. These
    squatters were members of an organization known as “Homes not Jails” and
    this was the “third time in three years the group [had] occupied a vacant
    building to bring attention to what they believe is a lack of affordable
    housing for homeless people in San Francisco.” Venise Wagner, ‘Protesting
    Squatters Yanked From Presidio[:] Homeless Advocates Took Over Apartments
    Slated for Demolition’, *S.F. Examiner*, Dec. 26, 1996, available in 1996
    WL 3723242. This protest came after “housing advocates declared a housing
    emergency in San Francisco. In November, for example, the Tenderloin
    Housing Clinic turned away 300 people, compared with the usual 10 to 20,
    because its 1,100 residential hotel rooms were occupied.” *Id.* It is
    possible that communities like Christiana in Denmark could develop from
    military complexes. See *infra* Part IV.C.

[^150]: See generally *Cal. ‘The Time of Commencing Actions for the Recovery
    of Real Property’ Code* § 325 (West 1997).

[^151]: Note that these agencies are for-profit organizations, unlike the
    squatters' agencies found in the United Kingdom. See *supra* note 76.

[^152]: Jessica Crosby, ‘Urban Squatters May Be Headed for O.C.
    Neighborhoods’, *Orange County Reg.*, May 14, 1995, available in 1995 WL
    5849615.

[^153]: *Id.*

[^154]: *Id.*

[^155]: Rick Burnham, ‘Old Law Fuels New Problems[.] Squatters Take Over
    Abandoned Homes’, *Press-Enterprise* (Riverside, Cal.), Apr. 5, 1996,
    available in 1996 WL 3274010.

[^156]: *Id.*

[^157]: *Id.*

[^158]: Don Babwin, ‘Good Deal—Bad Dream[:] Arcane Legal Argument Tied to
    House Rental Scheme’, *Press-Enterprise* (Riverside, Cal.), May 30, 1995,
    available in 1995 WL 8897314.

[^159]: Bhavna Mistry, ‘Palmdale ‘Landlord’ Suspected of Fraud’, *L.A. Daily
    News*, June 29, 1996, available in 1996 WL 6564557.

[^160]: Andrew Horan et al., ‘Foreclosure Pitfall’, *Orange County Reg.*, Jan.
    31, 1995, available in 1995 WL 5828724.

[^161]: *Id.*

[^162]: Bentham, *Theory of Legislation: Principles of the Civil Code* 111–13
    (Hildreth ed., 1931), reprinted in Berger, *supra* note 1, at p. 3.

[^163]: Hendrix, *supra* note 19, at p. 183. Hendrix in his article argues
    that studies show land titling is not a panacea to economic and social
    problems in LDCs as many proponents claim. *Id.*

[^164]: *Id.* at 194. The author states: “[p]ersons without title may invest
    less ‘sweat equity’-time and effort-into their land.” *Id.* For a case
    study on urban squatters in LDCs, see generally Charles L. Choguill, *New
    Communitiies For Urban Squatters* (1987). Choguill examines the plan to
    resettle 173,000 “shelter-less” individuals in Bangladesh who were forced
    to resettle into three camps, and “the chasm that can exist between
    planning and implementation [causing] such disastrous results.” *Id.* at
    p. 2. Choguill cites several factors that led to the failure of the plan,
    including: organizational issues, lack of resources, cultural
    understanding, inappropriate technology, and inadequate public
    participation. *Id.* at 8–12.

[^165]: For an urban squatter case study from the 1970s in Zambia, see David
    Pasteur, *The Management of Squatter Upgrading* p. 196 (1979). This
    experiment in LDC squatter development established broad and universal
    goals:

    > “[t]o improve the quality of life of people in the project areas… [t]o
    > enable the low income population to achieve an improved standard of
    > housing at a cost which can be afforded … [b]y providing security of
    > tenure and land for plots … [b]y provision of utilities, especially
    > water supply, sewage disposal, refuse disposal, security lighting and
    > road access … [b]y making maximum use of self-help labour in house
    > building … [b]y providing building materials loans.”

    *Id.* Although this study used a comprehensive and scientific methodology
    to address squatters' problems, its methods may be too complex for many
    LDCs. These almost utopian 1970s ideals for LDC squatter development are
    not unique. See also Michael Y. Seelis, *The Architecture of Self-Help
    Communities* (Sue Cymes et al. eds., 1978). This book contains 33 separate
    architectural entries for a worldwide contest that required the
    participants to design a squatter housing project for a city in the
    Philippines. The proposed housing had to be designed for low-income
    families in an area with a high density of people, with buildings that
    were low in height, that served as self-sufficient units, that maintained
    a pedestrian orientation, and that established an ecological fit. *Id.* at
    27. Despite the fact that many of these designs were probably relatively
    easy and inexpensive to build, little progress was made in constructing
    novel low-income housing.

[^166]: Fabio L. S. Petrarolha, ‘Brazil: The Meek Want the Earth Now’,
    *Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists*, Nov. 21, 1996, availablein 1996 WL
    8994403.

[^167]: Andrew Horan et al., ‘Foreclosure Pitfall’, *Orange County Reg.*, Jan.
    31, 1995, available in 1995 WL 5828724.

[^168]: Beth Cohen, *Housing, the State and Urban Squatter Settlements:
    Reviewing Policy and Prospects* (visited Nov. 2, 1996)
    <[http://lanic.utexas.edu/project/ppb/papers93-94/cohen.html](http://lanic.utexas.edu/project/ppb/papers93-94/cohen.html)>.

[^169]: ‘Nearly 700 Landless Peasants Take Over Brazilian Farm’, *Agence
    France-Presse*, Sept. 30, 1996, available in 1996 WL 12147992.

[^170]: *Id.*

[^171]: Mary Anastasia O'Grady, ‘The Americas: Muddled Policies Spark
    Brazilian Land Wars’, *Wall St. J.*, Oct. 20, 1995, availablein 1995
    WL-WSJ 9904714.

[^172]: United States Department of State, *supra* note 168. Additionally, in
    1997, three squatters were killed when police attacked an abandoned
    housing project while trying to enforce an eviction order. ‘Squatter
    Crisis Eases in Brazil[:] Police, Homeless Back Off in Dispute that Left
    Three Dead’, *Sun-Sentinel* (Ft. Lauderdale, Fla.), May 22, 1997,
    available in 1997 WL 3106330. The police captain claimed that the
    squatters “attacked with sticks and stones and gunfire,” but one squatter
    claimed that the “squatters had no fire arms, ‘only sticks and stones.’”
    *Id.* Consistent with other Brazilian police action, the squatter claimed
    that “he saw police shoot his friend in the back.” *Id.*

[^173]: O'Grady, *supra* note 172.

[^174]: *Id.*

[^175]: United States Department of State, *supra* note 168.

[^176]: *Id.*

[^177]: ‘Brazil Says Squatters Were Executed in Camp’, *Record* (Northern
    N.J.), Aug. 25, 1995, available in 1995 WL 3477227.

[^178]: *Id.*

[^179]: *Nearly 700 Landless PeasantsTake Over Brazilian Farm*, *supra* note
    170.

[^180]: United States Department of State, *supra* note 168.

[^181]: Petrarolha, *supra* note 167.

[^182]: *Id.*

[^183]: *Id.*

[^184]: *Id.*

[^185]: *Hendrix*, *supra* note 19, at p. 195 (quoting Peter C. Bloch, *Land
    Tenure Issues in River Basin Development in Sub-Saharan Africa* p. 26
    (1986)).

[^186]: 187

[^187]: Squatters and poor property rights have also called environmental
    degradation in Malaysia. See *infra* Part IV.F.2.

[^188]: The international right to housing is supported by numerous United
    Nations covenants, conferences, resolutions, declarations, and
    recommendations. See *supra* note 6.

[^189]: Dewan Negara, 552, ‘196 Squatters Identified Under Ministry Census
    Note’, *New Straits Times*, May 27, 1997, available in 1997 WL 2962833.
    Interestingly, of the half-million squatters, “90,417 were foreigners.”
    *Id.* Malaysian officials estimate that, “450,000 legal foreign workers
    [and] more than one million illegal labourers, mainly from Burma,
    Bangladesh, India, Indonesia, Pakistan, the Philippines and Thailand”
    currently reside in Malaysia. Joseph Chin, ‘Malaysia Prepares New Year
    Crack Down On Illegal Workers’, *Agence France-Presse*, Dec. 30, 1996,
    available in *Lexis*, World Lib., *Allnws* File.

[^190]: ‘Squatting on a Problem’, *New Strait Times*, Apr. 3, 1996, available
    in 1996 WL 9812791.

[^191]: *Id.*

[^192]: *Chin*, *supra* note 190.

[^193]: 194

[^194]: *Id.*

[^195]: *Squatting on a Problem*, *supra* note 191.

[^196]: Teoh Teik Hoong, ‘Government Offers to Help Squatters in
    Fire-Fighting’, *New Straits Times*, Aug. 31, 1995, available in *Lexis*,
    World Lib., *Allnws* File.

[^197]: *Id.* These fire brigades might have helped squatters recently when
    “100 people were made homeless after their container homes were destroyed
    by fire.” Noor Adzman Baharuddin, *New Straits Times*, ‘100 Loose
    Container Homes in Fire’, Jan. 3, 1997, available in 1997 WL 2943254.

[^198]: Khairunnisa Hussin, ‘Plan to Take Over Trash Collection in Squatter
    Areas’, *New Straits Times*, Jan. 27, 1995, available in *Lexis*, World
    Lib., *Allnws* File.

[^199]: *Id.*

[^200]: ‘Priority for Building of Community Halls’, *New Straits Times*, Jan.
    5, 1996, available in 1996 WL 8260695.

[^201]: *Id.*

[^202]: *Id.*

[^203]: United States Department of State, *The Philippines Human Rights
    Practices*, 1995, Department of State Dispatch (Mar. 1996), availablein
    *Lexis*, International Law Lib., *Dstate* File.

[^204]: *Id.*

[^205]: *Id.*

[^206]: *Id.*

[^207]: ‘Squatters Battle to Save Dwellings in Philippines’, *San Diego
    Union-Tribune*, Jan. 16, 1997, available in 1997 WL 3111525.

[^208]: *Id.*

[^209]: Claire Wallerstein, ‘New Houses Rise from City Dump; Smokey Mountain
    Has Been Built Over’, *Guardian* (London), Sept. 1, 1997, available in
    1997 WL 2398877.

[^210]: *Id.*

[^211]: Keith B. Richburg, ‘10,000 Left Homeless in Manila Beautification:
    Heavy-Handed Move Reminiscent of Marcos Abuses’, *Orrawa Citizen*, Nov.
    18, 1996, available in 1996 WL 3624689. Other Asian countries have
    attempted to remove squatters from their settlements. For example, in
    India, the government created a “scheme to rehabilitate the 55,000-odd
    squatters living in [‘objectionable areas’].” ‘India: Squatters to Be
    Rehabilitated Outside City’, *Hindu*, Dec. 5, 1996, available in 1996 WL
    14122800. Under this plan squatters will be removed from their dwellings
    “along rivers, canals, roads and rail tracks in the metropolitan area …
    [to] tenements to be built outside the city.” *Id.* A reported “56,000
    families live on objectionable locations” and their resettlement, coupled
    with adequate replacement housing, might act to improve the health,
    safety, and welfare of both squatters and non-squatters. *Id.* See
    generally Devendra B. Gupta, *Urban Housing in India* (1985). Gupta claims
    that “because of the enormity of the problem of slums and squatting and
    the paucity of resources, the focus of the government program has
    presently shifted to the worst slums.” *Id.* at p. 102. It remains to be
    seen whether the new-found economic success of India will impact its many
    citizens who face housing and basic sustenance problems.

[^212]: *Id.*

[^213]: *Id.*

[^214]: ‘Housing for Asia's Poor’, *Market Asia Pacific*, Apr. 1, 1996,
    available in *Lexis*, World Lib., *Allnws* File.
