% So You Say You Want an Insurrection
% CrimethInc.
% 2010

![](images/crimethincinsurrection/1.gif)

> **So do we—a total break with domination and hierarchy in all their forms,
> involving an armed uprising if need be. Until that's possible, we'll settle
> for recurring clashes in which to develop our skills, find comrades, and
> emphasize the gulf between ourselves and our oppressors.**

> **But how do we bring about these confrontations? How do we ensure that they
> strengthen us more than our enemies? What pitfalls await us on this road?
> And what else do we have to do to make our efforts effective?**

Over the past few years, a small current[^1] has gained visibility in US
anarchist circles prioritizing the themes of insurrection and social conflict.
Like any ideological milieu, it's a lot more diverse than it appears from a
distance. Some strains emphasize confrontation for its own sake, rather than
as a means of achieving reforms; others frame revolt as a means of building
the power of the oppressed outside static organizations. The common thread is
that all are critical of formal institutions and focus on attack as their
central theme.

How effective are these strategies at achieving their professed goals? To
answer this question, we can't simply study insurrectionist theory in a
vacuum; we have to look at the activities associated with it in the US
context. In practice, it's not always easy to tell where strategic
considerations leave off and matters of emotional and psychological
temperament begin; in this case, both are relevant. Much of what we will
discuss below is not so much a matter of what insurrectionists say but of what
they do.

This subject is of particular interest to us because we are insurrectionists
of a sort, whether or not we use that adjective. For well over a decade, we've
focused on confrontational struggle based in individual initiative, informal
networks, and ad hoc organization. Starting with shoplifting[^2] and vandalism
and working up to streetfighting[^3] and clandestine direct action, we've
learned the advantages and disadvantages of this approach on our own skin. One
is always most critical of what is closest to one's heart: most eager to see
it succeed, and most concerned about potential errors.

In some ways, this is a very old line of thinking—perhaps older than some of
its adherents realize. One genealogy traces its origins to the dispute between
Marx[^4] and Bakunin[^5] over the organizational forms of the Paris
Commune[^6]. Some insurrectionists see precedents in the propaganda of the
deed[^7] carried out by Nineteenth-century assassins[^8] and the
illegalism[^9] associated with Jules Bonnot[^10] and his fellow bank robbers.
We can trace the lineage of current insurrectionist theory from Errico
Malatesta[^11] and Luigi Galleani[^12] through the works of Alfredo
Bonanno[^13], Jean Weir[^14], and others who attempted to distill lessons from
the social struggles of the 1960s and 70s.

At the same time, the latest wave of insurrectionist ideas is something of a
new phenomenon in the US, where the high turnover rate in most anarchist
communities often dooms them to relearn the same lessons over and over. One
can hardly blame the new generations for this—if anything, the older
generations are to blame for dropping out or refusing to communicate. Seasoned
anarchists have to be especially cautious not to be dismissive and hostile
about the enthusiasms of their young comrades. Ten years ago, we were the
upstarts whose new energy and muddled ideas provoked all the testy veterans;
we were able to learn from some of their criticisms, no thanks to them, but
their disdain contributed to our defensiveness and their marginalization. If
we accept roles on the opposite side of this dynamic now, we may doom those
who come after us to repeat the same pattern.

In that spirit, let's start with the advantages of insurrection as a point of
departure.

## Starting from Revolt…

> “Attack is the refusal of mediation, pacification, sacrifice, accommodation,
> and compromise in struggle. It is through acting and learning to act, not
> propaganda, that we will open the path to insurrection, although analysis
> and discussion have a role in clarifying how to act. Waiting only teaches
> waiting; in acting one learns to act.”
>
> — “Insurrectionary Anarchy: Organizing for Attack,”[^15] in Do or Die
> \#10[^16]

![The answer is always no.](images/crimethincinsurrection/2.jpg)

Many organizations and movements, including some that are explicitly
anarchist, promise to challenge the powers that be as soon as the groundwork
has been prepared; but the world is always changing, and one may lay a
foundation only to discover that the terrain has shifted. Once one gets used
to waiting, even if it is only a matter of needing to prepare a little more,
it is always easier to go on waiting. Revolution, like parenthood and
everything else momentous in life, is something one can never be adequately
prepared for.

Often, this preparation is framed in terms of the need to do more outreach and
education. But until there is a clash, until the lines are drawn, there is
nothing to talk about. Most people tend to remain aloof from theoretical
discussions, but when something is *happening*, when the stakes are high and
they can see concrete differences between opposing sides, they will take a
stand. In forcing such ruptures, one can compel those who hide authoritarian
and capitalist allegiances to show their true colors, while offering everyone
else the opportunity to form *other* allegiances.

Sometimes one has to aim beyond the target in order to strike it. Perhaps in
the pacified US, some have to decry all compromise and deliberation to resist
co-optation and paralysis. By interrupting the apparent consensus and social
peace, confrontations make injustice visible and legitimize the rage others
feel as well. When the fog of apparently universal submission is dispelled,
those who wish to fight can finally find each other—and readiness to fight is
a better basis for allegiance than merely *ideological* agreement.

The form of one's immediate actions should match one's long-term goals.
Theoretical elaborations give rise to more of the same. Focusing on winning
reforms tends to contribute to the development of reformist logic. If you want
to destroy all forms of domination, it's best to confront them all from the
outset.

## … and Spreading to Resistance

> “Insurrectionary anarchism, therefore, places particular importance on the
> circulation and spread of action, not managed revolt, for no army or police
> force is able to control the generalised circulation of such autonomous
> activity…\
> What the system is afraid of is not just these acts of sabotage themselves,
> but also them spreading socially.” —ibid[^17].

![Every action that dispels the illusions of order and resignation is a spell
cast for more of the same.](images/crimethincinsurrection/3.jpg)

Almost all strains of insurrectionist thought emphasize the importance of
revolt spreading. This is one of the best standards, then, by which to
evaluate insurrectionist efforts.

If both postponement and action tend to give rise to more of the same, then in
acting oneself, one extends an invitation to others. This is an argument for
carrying out actions that others can easily emulate, in hopes that they will
catch on.

That's the idea, anyway. Sometimes, of course, anarchists carry out an action
others could easily emulate, but no one does. What *other* factors enable an
action to inspire more actions?

## Even if the Time Is Not Ripe

> “We are insurrectionalist anarchists… because rather than wait, we have
> decided to proceed to action, even if the time is not ripe.”
>
> — Alfredo Bonanno, The Insurrectional Project [^18]

It is an article of faith among most insurrectionists that one should not wait
for the appropriate material conditions, but should attack immediately. As a
defense against the sort of postponement described above, this makes perfect
sense; as a moral obligation or an axiom to govern every decision, it can be
dangerously counterproductive.

Insurrectionist theory allows for this, but in practice insurrectionists do
not always make the wisest choices. This is one of the cases in which it can
be difficult to differentiate between insurrectionism as a program with
concrete goals and insurrectionism as a matter of disposition. To react
immediately against oppression without thought for the consequences is
beautiful, and perhaps a way to recover one's humanity in a desensitizing
world—but it is not always strategic.

This does not stop some from posing it as strategic. People who grew up in a
society founded on Christian notions of moral law[^19] often argue for their
own preferences as universally valid prescriptions. It's surprising how
judgmental people who claim to reject morality can be!

So is insurrectionism a religion, or a strategy? If it is a religion, its
precepts are timeless and unconditional: categorical imperatives. If, on the
other hand, it is a strategy, developed under specific conditions, we should
think hard about how those conditions might be different from ours, and how we
should adjust it accordingly.

So is insurrectionism a religion, or a strategy? If it is a religion, its
precepts are timeless and unconditional: categorical imperatives. If, on the
other hand, it is a strategy, developed under specific conditions, we should
think hard about how those conditions might be different from ours, and how we
should adjust it accordingly.

When Bonanno originally formulated his analysis in the 1970s, Italy was in the
midst of an upheaval[^20] that threatened the entire social order;
authoritarian and anti-authoritarian currents intermingled and contended in
the course of struggling against the government. He was not making an argument
for precipitating clashes where there were none so much as proposing an
organizational strategy to ensure that ongoing clashes would promote liberty
and autonomy. Contemporary US anarchists reading texts such as Armed Joy[^21]
do not always understand this, interpreting them instead as a challenge to
escalate tactics on a personal basis.

Of course, in a society based on competition and exploitation, there are
always clashes, however subtle. One doesn't have to precipitate new ones; it
is enough to fight where one stands. Unfortunately, the insurrectionist
imagination is often limited by the most well-known models for attack. Imagine
an insurrectionist who goes to work or school during the week but smashes bank
windows on the weekends—hesitating to create a rupture in the fabric of her
own daily life while willingly risking felonies to destroy things outside it.
If such a lifestyle could make sense, it is an admission that one must still
choose carefully when and how to “proceed to action.” We're not convinced it
does make sense, but that doesn't mean the insurrectionist in question would
be better off immediately smashing the windows in her own workplace.

If “proceeding to action even if the time is not ripe” doesn't mean picking up
the closest heavy object and attacking the nearest person in a uniform, what
does it mean? How do we decide what kinds of action are most worthwhile?

* * *

\redstart

On Mayday, several dozen masked hoodlums rampage through an upscale shopping
district in downtown San Francisco, smashing windows and setting off
fireworks. Afterwards an anonymous statement on Indymedia[^22] reads, in
part:

“De Beers, Prada, Coach, Tumi, Wells Fargo, Longchamp, Macy's, Armani, Crate
and Barrel, Montblanc, Urban Outfitters and Guess were all targeted for all
kinds of boring ass political shit, but primarily because fuck them.
Exploitation is the norm of economic activity, not the exception. We see no
need to reveal our laundry list of grievances and solidarity.”

Much has changed since the communiqué from the ACME collective[^23]
following the black bloc[^24] at the WTO protests in Seattle[^25]. In 1999,
the ACME statement was widely read and debated, influencing the politics of
a new generation that saw more sense in opposing corporate power with
crowbars than with signs or lockboxes. A decade later, black-clad anarchists
are miraculously still finding ways to smash windows, despite
ever-increasing surveillance and repression—but the communiqué, if not the
action itself, seems to be directed only to those who understand and approve
of the tactic.

\redstop

## Against Subculture

> “Particularly to be avoided are the cultural and activist circles… All
> milieus are counter-revolutionary because they are only concerned with the
> preservation of their sad comfort.”
>
> — The Coming Insurrection[^26]

Historically, insurrectionist anarchism has centered around a rejection of
static organizational structures. In the US, where long-standing anarchist
organizations are not particularly common or powerful, it has recently come to
be framed more as a reaction against *cultural* factors. Some insurrectionists
conceptualize their position as a break with what they consider to be
hopelessly passive and assimilated anarchist subcultures—bicycling as an end
in itself, potlucks that never end in streetfighting, and so on. Some take
this further, dismissing the very idea that subculture could have any radical
potential.

What does it mean to dismiss subculture? Culture is as ubiquitous among human
beings as language; you can challenge it, you can even destroy it, but you
generate new culture in the process. In general, this dismissal does not seem
to proceed from some mystical doctrine that we could escape culture per se,
the way that John Zerzan[^27] preached a primitivist utopia without language,
but rather from a reaction to the subcultural identifications of the preceding
generation of anarchists. As explored in Rolling Thunder \#8[^28], by the time
today's young anarchists came of age, the punk scene that sired so many of
their predecessors had come to be dominated by reactionary elements. Faced
with this, rejecting one subculture was not enough—why not reject subculture
*itself*?

Young insurrectionists are not the first to attempt this: one can find similar
rhetoric in books like *Days of War, Nights of Love*[^29]. Before an idea wins
many proponents, it's easy to declare that it transcends subculture, as it is
not incarnated in any particular social context. Once it gains adherents,
however, things get more complicated. In all likelihood, the proponents will
share subcultural reference points—how else would they have encountered the
idea?—and failing this, they are bound to create common points of reference in
the course of attempting to put the idea into practice. Culture is simply a
matter of points of reference, and the more obscure they are, the more
“subcultural”—in this regard, ideological insurrectionism is a significantly
more subcultural current than, say, the vegan straightedge[^30] scene.

Actual insurrections can transcend subcultural boundaries in ways that
theories do not, of course; likewise, cross-cultural spaces can sometimes
create fertile ground for uprisings. There's a lot to be said for forging
bonds between different communities in struggle[^31], demonstrating that
resistance is not the sole province of any one demographic. Were it not for
the homogeneity of most insurrectionist circles, it would be possible to read
this criticism of subculture as an argument for cross-cultural spaces, rather
than as an underhanded way to promote yet another new subculture. There is no
such thing as a zone free of cultural identifiers—efforts to stay free of
cultural limitations must begin by integrating multiple cultural contexts
rather than pretending to be outside all of them.

Perhaps, like the authors of the aforementioned *Days of War*, some people
have to espouse a grandiose opposition to culture itself just to feel entitled
to get something new off the ground. But eventually, when that new something
has gotten going and become subculturally identified, they will need a
critique that acknowledges this—otherwise, they are bound to be quarantined
and neutralized like their predecessors. Those who think they can discount
culture entirely are trying to throw out the baby with the bathwater—an
especially difficult project when *you're* the baby.

This dispute about culture parallels the much older dispute between
insurrectionists and anarchists who believe in building long-term
institutions. The latter argue[^32] that insurrectionist criticism of
institutions is founded on the notion that formal structures are inescapably
hierarchical, but counter that this analysis provides insurrectionists with no
tools to challenge the subtle hierarchies that develop in informal networks.
Decrying authoritarian tendencies and cultural complacency in competing
ideological milieus is no proof against falling prey to them oneself.So, are
all subcultures “only concerned with the preservation of their sad comfort”?
Perhaps this is simply a matter of semantics, of calling social circles that
are only concerned with preserving their comfort “milieus.” Is there a
positive role that subculture could play in fomenting insurrections?

Let's return to the question of how action proliferates. As pointed out above,
simply doing things that “anyone else can do” is not itself enough to spread
resistance. The premise of this approach is that others who share similar
frustrations will see the actions and understand the strategy embodied in
them, and that this alone will move them to action. But this takes for granted
that the actions will be visible and the strategy comprehensible across
cultural lines; it also disregards the ways that desire is determined by
culture as well as class.

Many of the assassins who killed presidents and tsars over a century ago
passionately believed that these actions would inspire the oppressed to rise
up. Clandestine “armed struggle” groups have sometimes used the same logic.
One common insurrectionist critique of these groups is that their actions are
too specialized; but this does not explain why more easily reproducible
tactics often fail to catch on. Another critique of armed groups is that they
separate themselves from others so energy and ideas cease to flow[^33]; this
seems more to the point. One could argue that the circulation of insurgent
desires and values—essentially a cultural phenomenon—is as indispensable for
the proliferation of revolt as gasoline is to a Molotov cocktail.

For example, over the past few years, North American anarchists have carried
out clandestine attacks on ATMs, bank windows, and other targets; this is
currently one of the best-known templates for insurrectionist activity. Such
nighttime attacks don't seem to have spread widely outside the anarchist
subculture in most of the cities in which they have occurred, but they have
given rise to copycat actions in other *anarchist* communities. This indicates
the importance of a common cultural context—shared values, points of
reference, and venues for communication. Acting sincerely can be contagious,
but our actions are always modeled on the examples we know and driven by the
values fostered by our communities.

People seem to be most likely to join revolts when doing so can help them meet
their needs. But needs themselves are socially produced: nobody needed cell
phones to maintain contact with their friends until a decade ago, for example,
and countless indigenous communities chose resistance over all sorts of
amenities until their lifeways were destroyed. The existing power structure is
generally at least as capable as radicals are of offering opportunities to
meet the needs it produces, whether through individual competition or
institutional reforms. A real counterculture fosters needs that capitalism and
democracy can never accommodate, such as the desire for human dignity.

Efforts to spread resistance must take this into account. Over the past half
century, insurrectionists overseas have frequently been subculturally
identified—for example, the Italian insurrectionist milieu of the 1980s and
90s was based in a network of autonomous social centers. In criticizing
long-term infrastructural projects and countercultural milieus, some US
insurrectionists reveal that they are unaware of the context behind the
overseas rioting that inspires them.

In response to the extravagant notion that we should jettison culture as a
site for mobilizing resistance, we counterpose the project of building a
*culture of resistance*, a space in which people of multiple cultural
backgrounds can develop common reference points in order to attack hierarchy
in all its forms.

## Against Anarchist Identity

A variant on the rejection of subculture is the rejection of anarchism as an
identity. This calls to mind another old question: should we organize
specifically as anarchists, or are other approaches more likely to produce
anarchy?

There is a lot to be said for resisting quarantine in closed circuits of the
converted. Picture a molecule that bonds with other molecules by sharing
electrons with them. If it has loose electrons, it is prone to creating new
connections or disruptions; on the other hand, if all of its electrons are in
stable bonds, it is unlikely to introduce new dynamics to the molecules around
it. Similarly, anarchists who seclude themselves in the company of committed
ideologues tend to become static and predictable, while those who limit their
participation in explicitly anarchist circles to stay open to other
relationships can sometimes catalyze waves of transformation.

At the same time, organizing on the basis of a social rather than ideological
position—for example, as queer youth, as a neighborhood, or as working class
people who like to break things—can be extremely challenging. Anyone who has
worked in coalitions knows how hard it can be to accomplish anything in the
face of massive internal differences in goals and values. This is true even
without centralized decision-making—think of the instances when presumed
comrades have pulled newspaper boxes back onto the sidewalk[^34] during street
confrontations. Perhaps the best approach is to organize at some intersection
of social position and ideology: for example, a gang who grew up together
discovers anticapitalist resistance, and sets out to introduce the possibility
to other gangs.

Often the ones at the forefront of clashes with the authorities are not
self-identifying anarchists at all, while anarchists with carefully
articulated political positions avoid conflict or even sabotage resistance.
People adopt political stances for all sorts of reasons, and these stances
frequently have nothing to do with how they actually conduct themselves. This
phenomenon corroborates insurrectionist skepticism about the importance of
ideological positions, but it also means that those who identify as
insurrectionists are no more likely to practice what they preach than anyone
else.

Despite the fact that avowed anarchism does not always correlate with active
resistance, there's no reason to believe struggles that are not identified as
anarchist are any more likely to produce anarchic situations or relationships.
If you're opposed to all forms of oppression, you may as well say so from the
outset, lest you leave an opening for authoritarians to hijack your efforts.

## Not Just Insurrection, but Anarchist Insurrection

> “‘Armed struggle’ is a strategy that could be put at the service of any
> project.”
>
> — At Daggers Drawn[^35]

![Fans of the LA Lakers celebrate a sports
victory.](images/crimethincinsurrection/4.jpg)

In the US, where militant political conflict is rare, it's tempting to assume
that clashes with authority are inherently antiauthoritarian. Insurrectionist
websites and magazines appropriate images from a wide variety of contexts;
some hail all sorts of antisocial crime as manifestations of social war,
without knowing the motivations of the protagonists.[^36]

But rebellion and street violence are not necessarily anarchist. Resistance to
oppressors is praiseworthy in itself, but much resistance takes place in
support of other authoritarian powers. This is all too familiar in other parts
of the world, where illegal violence on the part of fascists, paramilitaries,
gangs, drug cartels, mafias, and authoritarian revolutionary movements is an
essential aspect of domination. Aspiring authoritarians often take the lead in
attacking reigning authorities precisely in order to absorb and co-opt popular
unrest. Rioting per se is not always liberating—Kristallnacht[^37] was a riot
too. Even if some participants have the purest intentions, insurrections can
go any number of directions: remember what happened to the Russians following
the insurrection of 1917, or the Iranians following the insurrection of
1978-79[^38].

So anarchists must not only provoke confrontations, but also ensure that they
contribute to a more horizontal and decentralized distribution of power. In
this regard, glorifications of the superficial details of militant
confrontation—black masks, Molotov cocktails, and so on—are largely beside the
point, if not actively distracting. The flow of initiative among the rebels,
the ways decisions are made and skills are shared, the bonds that develop
between comrades: these are much more important. Likewise, one must strategize
as to how social uprisings will contribute to long-term revolutionary momentum
rather than simply enabling reactionary forces to consolidate power.

## Against Activism

A great deal has been said against activism[^39]: it is a specialized role
that frames social change as the domain of experts; it is predicated on
dialogue with the powers that be; it promotes inauthenticity and limits the
scope of change. A lot of this is mere semantics—many people who do not
deserve such accusations see themselves as activists. Some of it is projected
class resentment: those who have time to mess around in everyone else's
business, “changing the world” rather than solving the problems of
individualized survival, must have privileged access to resources, as the
right wing has always alleged.

It's not easy to distill the kernel of truth in this flood of vitriol, but one
thing is certain: activism that does not explicitly challenge hierarchy
fortifies it. Reformist struggles can win adjustments in the details of
oppression, but they ultimately help the state maintain its legitimacy in the
public eye—not only by giving it the chance to redress grievances, but by
reinforcing the notion that the power to effect meaningful change lies in the
hands of the authorities. It is better to struggle in such a way that people
develop an awareness of their own capabilities outside all petitioning and
bureaucracy. Reformist activism also tends to build up internal hierarchies:
as if by chance, the best negotiators and media liaisons often turn out to be
college-educated white people with good skin and conciliatory tones. Of
course, certain insurrectionist practices may simply build up hierarchies
according to different criteria.

## Sustaining Confrontations

The other lesson we can derive from a close study of activism is the
importance of not overextending. Some activities produce more energy and
resources than they consume; others cost more than they produce. Many activist
projects ultimately founder because they fail to recoup the resources invested
in them: one cannot carry on an exhausting undertaking indefinitely without
deriving the wherewithal for it from somewhere. Of course, these resources can
take a wide variety of forms: a Books to Prisoners[^40] group may consume a
great deal of labor hours, but persist so long as the social connections it
provides are rewarding; traveling around the country to participate in riots
may be expensive in terms of gas and bail money, but if it is exciting and
empowering enough, the participants will come up with the cash somehow. On the
other hand, if a million dollars must be raised for court costs following
every demonstration, this may prove prohibitive, unless each demonstration
wins new allies with deep pockets.

Activities that cost more resources than they produce are not necessarily bad,
but you have to strategize accordingly if you wish to participate in them.
Ironically, despite insurrectionist hostility to activism, strategies that
focus on confrontation are often at least as costly in this regard as
traditional activist organizing. In dismissing goal-oriented struggles in
favor of confrontation for its own sake, some US insurrectionists set
themselves up for burnout. Symbolic clashes can help develop the capacity to
fight for more concrete objectives, but not if they are so costly that they
drain their social base out of existence. Breaking windows is a dead end
unless it helps to generate a widespread social movement[^41]—or at least
provides access to enough of the commodities behind the windows to fund the
vandals' eventual court cases.

The most sustainable forms of confrontation seize resources which can then be
employed in further struggle. The classic example of this is the European
squatting movement[^42] of thirty years ago, in which the occupied buildings
were used as staging areas for further social struggles. This approach
supersedes both self-defeating reformist activism and self-destructive
insurrectionist dogma. Unless it provides for the practical needs of the
participants, insurrectionism is just an expensive hobby: activism with felony
charges and a smaller base of support. Insurrectionists of other eras have
recognized this and robbed banks rather than simply smashing their windows.

Revenge is itself a need, but it is hardly the only need. People who face
enough challenges just getting by will not be much more attracted to
gratuitous vandalism than they are to activism that has nothing to do with
their daily lives; on the other hand, tactics that enable them to sustain
themselves may be more appealing. Insurrectionists who are frustrated with the
lifestyle-oriented anarchism of those they perceive as “subcultural” actually
stand to learn a lot from them. The latter remain involved in their version of
anarchist community not because of moral or ideological imperatives, but
because it sustains them. For insurrection to spread, it must do the same.

## Making a Virtue of Repression

In the US, militant struggle means taking on the most powerful state in the
history of the world. It demands a strategy that takes into account the
repression, legal support, and prison sentences that will inevitably result,
and somehow turns them to our advantage. The absence of such a strategy is
perhaps the most significant structural flaw in insurrectionist projects
today. We have to engage with the issue of repression beyond the usual
security culture, limited prisoner support, occasional solidarity actions, and
wishful thinking. “Don't get caught” isn't a plan, it's a prayer.

It's embarrassing to acknowledge, but the activists who practiced non-violent
civil disobedience in the US during the 1980s and 90s were miles ahead in
this regard, integrating their arrests, court cases, and prison sentences into
their campaigns as strategic moves. Their approach was predicated on privilege
and glorified victimhood in the most noxious ways, but perhaps we can still
learn something from them in order to make the most of repression and ongoing
prisoner support in our own struggle.

The current case of the RNC 8[^43], in which anarchists have been targeted
with conspiracy charges for organizing actions against the 2008 Republican
National Convention[^44], may offer one starting point. The defendants have
used their case to delegitimize the government and win allies in other
communities; as of this writing, they seem to have the prosecutors on the
defensive, as the terrorism charges against them have just been dropped and
the case is widely acknowledged to be an embarrassment. If they had simply
been anonymous vandals, rather than highly visible organizers, this might not
have been possible.

## Is It Safer in the Shadows, or in the Spotlight?

> “No leaders to round up, no hierarchical organisation to wield power over us
> in our name, no membership lists to investigate, no manifestos to denounce,
> no mediators to meet (and then join) the power-holding elite. No public
> claims are made, no symbolic lines are drawn, no press statements to be
> deliberately misconstrued and trivialised by journalists. No platforms or
> programmes which the intellectuals can hijack as their exclusive property,
> no flag or banner to which to pledge a crass and sectarian allegiance.”
>
> — “Insurrectionary Anarchy: Organizing for Attack”[^45]

No membership, no statements, no public face. This might make it harder for
the state to single out enemies, but it also sounds a little like the
invisibility and isolation that make it so hard for comrades to find each
other and get started.

In the current atmosphere of repression, the insurrectionist approach is often
framed as a question of security: with infiltrators everywhere and the legal
repercussions of resistance intensifying, it is simply too dangerous to engage
in visible organizing. However, it's far from certain that less visibility is
any more likely to make anarchists safer or more effective.

It often happens that in attempting to correct old errors, people commit new
ones; forsaking problematic strategies, they learn the hard way what
advantages led their predecessors to adopt them in the first place. So it is
that anarchists, who only came into the public eye a decade ago, are now
fantasizing about returning to the shadows.

The government would like nothing better than for anarchists to retreat to
private scenes and cliques, leaving few opportunities for unconnected
individuals to get involved. It is to the authorities' advantage for small
numbers of radicals to escalate to more militant tactics while losing
connection to a broader social base; this makes direct action less likely to
spread, while rendering it easier to justify repression. It might be harder to
track down clandestine groups at first, but recent FBI investigations, such as
Operation Backfire[^46], [^47] show that closed, high-security structures are
not impenetrable. One can also look at the case of the Tarnac Nine[^48],
French radicals who are currently being charged with terrorist conspiracy;
they are also alleged to be involved in authoring the book *The Coming
Insurrection*[^49], which champions “zones of opacity” impenetrable to the
authorities. In fact, such zones do not result only from proper control of
information, but also from the appearance of so many insurgent groups that the
authorities cannot keep up with all of them at once.

If this is true, the most pressing task for anarchists is not to carry out
secretive military strikes but to spread skills and practices. There is no
substitute for participatory activities that offer points of entry for new
people and opportunities for existing groups to connect. Likewise, refusing to
interact with the public effectively means leaving it to the corporate media
to tell one's story—or else suppress it. Just as insurrectionists must tie the
escalation of conflict to the pace at which it spreads so as not to overextend
themselves, they must also balance the practical advantages of secrecy against
the necessity of circulating new formats and rebellious energy.

This also has a bearing on whether it is safer and more strategic for
anarchists to act alone with the element of surprise, outside any conventional
“political” framework, or to participate in broader campaigns and
mobilizations. In the latter context, the state is often more prepared and
vigilant, rendering successful attacks more difficult from a purely military
point of view; on the other hand, arrestees are more likely to receive support
from outside the immediate anarchist community, and their actions may be more
visible and comprehensible to others.

All this is not to say that anarchist organizing should be visible in the same
way conventional political campaigns are. The point is to ensure that
anarchist *models* of resistance are accessible to everyone, not to promote
the popularity of a platform or spokesperson or party. The chief dangers of
visibility are not posed by the police, after all, but by the possibility of
being absorbed into the spectacle, performing for the cameras until one comes
to mistake representations for reality.

![No less dangerous than the police is the tendency to internalize the logic
of spectacle, performing for the cameras until one comes to mistake
representations for reality.](images/crimethincinsurrection/5.jpg)

* * *

\redstart

The economy has just crashed, and the anarchists who have spent the
preceding half decade building up various anticapitalist infrastructures are
eager to assert themselves and their alternative in the public eye. Some
friends have been tossing around the idea of a street party, and two dozen
people meet to discuss it. The street party becomes A Funeral for
Capitalism, intended to initiate a public dialogue on how to mobilize a
grass-roots response to the crisis. Handbills and stickers appear
everywhere; in planning meetings, the organizers picture themselves at the
helm of a crowd of hundreds, tying together public merriment and resource
distribution in a two-pronged assault.

But the night of the street party is unseasonably cold, and only fifty
diehards show up, finding themselves nearly the only pedestrians on the
street. They barely make it one block before a lone police officer pulls
over and charges into the crowd, seizing someone at random in hopes of
setting an example to scare the others onto the sidewalk. To his surprise,
he meets a rain of blows. These are not the hesitant activists of the
previous generation, but a fiercer new breed.

His intended victim escapes; he snatches another, but the same struggle
ensues. Backup has arrived by now, and eventually the police manage to
capture a single partygoer.

The rest regroup at a nearby café. Almost everyone who was in the street is
present; there is a new sense of common cause. Within a couple hours, they
have raised enough money to bond the arrestee out of jail; a couple weeks
later, a benefit show featuring a puppet show and a bake sale draws more
participants than the street party did and raises all the funds necessary
for legal fees.

Eventually the defendant negotiates a favorable plea bargain. Just as the
bond money comes back, a comrade in another community is arrested on
conspiracy charges, and the idea arises to donate the money to his support
fund: so in coming into conflict with the authorities, the community has
actually become more capable of extending solidarity to other communities.

Yet amidst all the hubbub, everyone has forgotten about engaging with the
public at large, as the issue shifted imperceptibly from the economic crisis
to the injustice of police repression. Bonds are tighter among the radicals,
thanks to puppetry and baking no less than street bravado, but no tighter
with the rest of the city.

\redstop

## The Force of Insurrection

> “The force of an insurrection is social, not military. Generalised rebellion
> is not measured by the armed clash but by the extent to which the economy is
> paralysed, the places of production and distribution taken over, the free
> giving that burns all calculation…” — At Daggers Drawn[^50]

The force of an insurrection is social, not military. The power of anarchist
insurrection is determined not by military confrontations, but by how
pervasive resistance is, how widely distributed tactics and resources are, how
durable and extensive and genuinely liberating the relationships are that
underpin the whole endeavor. If our goal is not simply to persuade others—or,
let's be honest, *ourselves*—of our defiance, then we have to prioritize forms
of resistance that are either highly contagious or at least sustainable. Who
is the social body that is to rise up? Whence is it to come?

The force of insurrection is social, not military. This has long been an
established tenet of insurrectionists, but in practice it is one of the most
frequently forgotten. In focusing on attack, it is difficult not to end up
unconsciously adopting the military logic of one's enemies, gauging
effectiveness by the numbers of targets struck or the number of dollars' worth
of damage. Perhaps this is an inevitable risk of conceptualizing attack not as
a means but an end—if *attack* is valuable in itself, then isn't a “bigger”
attack better? This tendency is particularly dangerous for those who didn't
grow up with an example in their communities of what it looks like to wage
“social war,” who must invent their models for it from scratch.

The force of insurrection is social, not military. That means it depends on
the strength, solidarity, and relationships of an entire social body—not just
an affinity group or crew. Those who bake cupcakes for fundraisers are at
least as important as the arrested rioters; the effectiveness of the
fundraisers determines how much force insurgents can continue to wield in the
streets. One can break a window with a single brick and the muscles of one's
arm, but one can only participate in a long-running social conflict as part of
a community. Social force is absolutely a matter of culture, values,
allegiances, priorities; social war takes place on this terrain, which is
influenced by but distinct from the physical terrain of actual confrontations.
How many people will support you in a conflict? How many will join in
themselves? If you go to prison, will your grandmother support you? Will her
community?

The state often isolates rebels by means of a classic martial arts move[^51]:
it pushes them in the direction they were already headed, provoking them into
a showdown before they have built up the social force they need to survive it.
It is essential to set the pace of escalation oneself, avoiding unfavorable
engagements and resisting the temptation to focus on revenge. The ultimate
target of insurrectionist attack is not just the state, but also the passivity
of one's peers.

To return to our starting point, none of this is a reason *not* to act, or to
wait for the proper moment to assume hostilities. Social war, like class war,
is always taking place: like it or not, we are born into it, and decide at
every moment how we fight. The point is to act strategically, so as not to
fight alone.

This is especially complicated in today's context of surveillance and
repression. One must engage in a certain degree of clandestinity to be capable
of meaningful resistance at all. But if the most important aspect of
resistance is the relationships that result, it is a mistake to choose forms
of struggle that tend to produce smaller and smaller social bodies.
Historically, except when resistance is spreading like wildfire, resistance
movements tend to break down into smaller and smaller elements once they come
into open conflict with the state: think of the transition from Students for a
Democratic Society[^52] in the 1960s to the Weather Underground[^53] in the
1970s, or the trajectory of the Dutch squatting movement[^54] over the course
of the 1980s. If our social forms may become smaller as conflict intensifies,
it might be more sensible to maintain low-intensity warfare that does not
provoke the full wrath of the state, or else to start with the crowd as the
unit of resistance rather than the crew or affinity group. This is not to say
that we should not be organized in affinity groups, but that affinity group
action should be a means of catalyzing crowd activity rather than an end in
itself.

The authorities understand themselves to be engaged in social war, perhaps
more clearly than most insurrectionists do. They do not simply attack our
bodies with batons, pepper spray, and imprisonment; they also set out to
attack our relationships and social connections. It is significantly more
cost-effective for them to intimidate, isolate, or discredit radicals than to
imprison or kill them. In confrontations, we should recognize this
intimidation and isolation as their top priority, and defend our relationships
and our connections to others accordingly. They can beat or jail us as
individuals without winning the social conflict—the question is whether our
values and tactics take hold.

## Social War Requires Social Skills

> “Property destruction is not merely macho rabble-rousing or
> testosterone-laden angst release. Nor is it displaced and reactionary anger.
> It is strategically and specifically targeted direct action.”
>
> ­— ACME Collective, N30 Black Bloc Communiqué[^55]

Considering that insurrection depends on relationships, one would think that
insurrectionists would be the most personable anarchists, the most eager to
make friends and resolve conflicts. Ideally, insurrectionists would offer a
welcome contrast to strident pacifists and domineering reformists. It should
always be clear that militant action is not a macho performance but a
well-reasoned strategic decision, or at least an honest emotional expression.

It requires tremendous patience and social skills to lay the preconditions for
insurrection. Unfortunately, some who gravitate to insurrectionist ideas have
a predisposition for impatience and hostility. “Starting from attack” can be
attractive to those who don't want to have to talk through disagreements or be
accountable. In glorifying their preferred tactics over those of their
potential allies, such hotheads spread false dichotomies that cut them off
from the resources and support they need to make their attacks effective,
sustainable, and contagious.

One could view this tendency as an overreaction to the ponderous coalitions of
the antiwar movement[^56]. There is nothing good about enforced unity that
paralyzes the participants and discourages autonomous action. But a knee-jerk
rejection of everything that has made resistance movements possible in the
past has little to recommend it, either.

### Social Skills For Social War

-   decision-making structures and cultural conventions that encourage
    horizontal power dynamics
-   accountability processes to address internal domination
-   conflict resolution, both internally and with potential allies
-   the ability to provide for material, social, and emotional needs
-   the capability to reproduce the social forms of resistance faster than
    they are destroyed
-   the means to communicate beyond a single subculture
-   the flexibility to adjust according to context, rather than remaining
    caught in ritual

* * *

\redstart

It is April 21, 2001, and a black bloc is methodically knocking out all the
windows of a multinational bank in downtown Quebec City during the Free
Trade Area of the Americas summit[^57]. Street confrontations have been
going on for 24 hours straight; much of the city is awash in tear gas, and
increasing numbers of protesters are responding with Molotov cocktails and
other projectiles.

A crowd of local toughs watches the black bloc from a distance. They have
looked on sympathetically as the foreigners scuffled with riot police; the
locals have no great love for the police, and as Québécois they resent that
much of the occupying army has been brought in from English-speaking
provinces halfway across the continent. On the other hand, the activists are
invaders too, and now they're smashing up the city.

As the bloc sets out in search of another bank, the locals follow them,
picking up blunt objects and threatening them in limited English: “Fookers!”
A bearded older liberal sees this unfolding and falls in stride with the
toughs for a moment, pedantically explaining, “No, they're not fuckers, it's
just a *bad tactic*.” Appropriating what they understand to be a term of
biting abuse, the locals continue following the bloc, shouting “Bad
tak-teek! Bad tak-teek!”

One idealistic young anarchist falls back to reason with the pursuers.
“We're not against you—we're here to fight the same institutions that
dominate you, the multinational corporations and the neoliberal governments
that—” He is answered with a punch in the face that drops him to the ground.

This is the critical moment, in which the meaning of the whole mobilization
is at stake. If the locals and the black bloc come to blows, the narrative
of the weekend will shift from a showdown between People and Authority to
pointless fighting between Marginalized Radicals and Everybody Else. The
black bloc has a reputation for machismo; many other activists doubt their
maturity, if not their sincerity. Having grown up bullied and baited, having
become a militant anarchist in hopes of getting revenge, the young man must
feel the temptation to fight back. If he does, his comrades will leap to his
assistance. But he simply stands up and walks back to them, unsteady but
deliberate.

Two blocks further, the police loom into view: row after row of armored
storm troopers firing concussion grenades and rubber bullets at the narrow
lines of human beings before them. Both groups hesitate. The context has
shifted.

The locals eye the anarchists warily. “You are here to thrash our citéy?”
one calls out.

“No!” shouts back a man in a ski mask. “To FIGHT THE POLICE!”

“To fight the police?”

“To fight them, not you!”

“Fook the police!” shouts back another local, auspiciously.

Representatives of the two groups approach each other with guarded gaits.
Flash-bang grenades explode in the background as they hammer out a hasty
truce and shake hands. As the sun sets over Quebec City, locals with shirts
across their faces crouch alongside slingshot-wielding radicals in goggles
and bandannas, peppering the police with chunks of broken concrete.

\redstop

## Confronting All Forms of Oppression

![Insurrectionists coming from positions of comparative privilege cannot shrug
these off simply by donning a mask.](images/crimethincinsurrection/6.jpg)

Resistance movements have collapsed again and again amidst conflict over
accountability, privilege, and internal oppression—for example, in the US at
the beginning of the 1970s, and in Italy at the end of that decade. This
occurred on a smaller scale during the disintegration of the US
anti-globalization movement after the turn of the century; the consequences of
this in Eugene, Oregon are explored in “Green Scared”[^58] elsewhere on this
website.

In some circles, insurrectionists have a reputation for failing to focus on
these issues. This is extremely problematic—the point of anarchist activity is
to attack all forms of hierarchy, not just the targets that make for exciting
riot porn. Accountability and awareness of privilege strengthen the
relationships that make meaningful struggle possible; without these, an
affinity group can fall apart in the same way a movement can. Nurturing
healthy relationships is not an additional task anarchists must take on
alongside the project of resisting domination—it is the basis of that project,
and a way to safeguard it.

Even if the aforementioned bad reputation were only slander based on
circumstantial evidence, it would still pose challenges to insurrectionists,
for it enables their adversaries to paint them as irresponsible
hypocrites.[^59] Whenever anarchists fail to take the initiative to address
patriarchy, white supremacy, and other manifestations of hierarchy, they leave
themselves vulnerable to the machinations of liberals and others eager to
discredit militant resistance. Insurrectionists should take the lead to
develop tools for understanding and undermining privilege, so it is clear to
everyone that there is no dichotomy between confronting the powers that be and
addressing more subtle forms of hierarchical power.

Confrontational approaches are bound to encounter opposition at some point,
but if the opposition is coming from potential comrades, it's a warning sign
that one is on the wrong path. Unfortunately, defensive insurrectionists
sometimes react to this by isolating themselves further from constructive
criticism, wrongheadedly telling themselves that they don't need allies on the
path they have chosen.

## Languages of Exclusion

By all means, explode with rage. Refuse to reduce your raw anger to demands or
suspend your emotional responses to the tragedies around you. Turn your years
of pent-up anguish into a fearsome instrument of revenge. Don't translate your
grievances into the language of your oppressors—let them remain burning embers
to be hurled from catapults. Attack, negate, destroy.

But if it's *rage* you're feeling, why quote philosophy professors[^60]?

If some strands of contemporary US insurrectionism seem to have given up in
advance on the possibility of connecting with comrades outside their immediate
cliques, this is especially apparent in their esoteric language and points of
reference. Talk about “zones of opacity”—and the dangers of becoming trapped
in a milieu!

Perhaps this is because so much insurrectionist theory has arrived from
overseas in poor translation. Domestic insurrectionists emulate the obtuse
style of their favorite texts, and the resulting gibberish highlights the
absurdity of attempting to transpose an approach from its original context
without reconsidering it. We're not qualified to critique insurrectionist
writing from France or Italy, where presumably every dishwasher enjoys
Foucault[^61] and Negri[^62]—but in the US, words like “projectuality” make a
lot of people stop listening.

Another source of this tendency can be found in the influence of academia. In
the ivory tower, which is predicated on exclusion, academics are rewarded for
developing abstruse language and theory. For some insurrectionists,
appropriating such language must seem the same as appropriating other status
symbols, such as the hip American Apparel® outfits ubiquitous in certain
scenes. But “every tool has a world connected to it at the handle,” and the
exclusivity of academia comes with the terminology.

Of course, some people are attracted to exclusive language—especially people
who desire to see themselves as part of an elect in-group. A milieu that
attracts a lot of this kind of energy is not likely to make a welcoming space
for a broad range of participants; it also might not have a lot of staying
power. Capitalist consumerism depends on new trends every season, and that
goes for ideas as well as fashion: what is hip one year is guaranteed to be
passé the next.

The alternative to this, amply demonstrated by other US insurrectionists, is
not to communicate in dumbed-down prose like some communist splinter group,
nor to affect the slang of imagined class allies, but simply to express
oneself in a straightforward manner and not take common context for granted.
Recovering obscurantists could try writing in the language they use when they
talk with their neighbors or relatives. You can't expect others to step
outside their comfort zones unless you are willing to do the same yourself.

![](images/crimethincinsurrection/7.gif)

## Striking Poses vs. Decolonizing Violence

> “We can become our own riot porn production machine, but this is less
> important than ‘creating the conditions where an offensive can sustain
> itself without fading, of establishing the material solidarities that allow
> us to hold on.’”
>
> —Total Destroy \#3[^63]

![By and large, radicals in the US have an especially mediated relationship to
violence. Small wonder if they find themselves acting out programmed roles
when they attempt to integrate violence into their
resistance.](images/crimethincinsurrection/8.jpg)

By and large, people in the US—particularly white people[^64]—have an
especially mediated relationship to violence. This is not to say that we are
never exposed to violence, but that proportionately, we witness
representations of it more often than we experience it directly. The land
beneath our feet was bought with the extermination of its former inhabitants,
the commodities that sustain our lifestyles flow in on a sea of blood, but
when we think of violence we generally picture stylized images on television
and movie screens. Small wonder if radicals who attempt to integrate violence
into their resistance find themselves acting out programmed roles.

“Riot porn,” the depictions of anti-authoritarian violence that abound in
insurrectionist media, is only a subset of the representations of sex and
violence surrounding us in this society. Pornography doesn't just cater to
desire—it also shapes and directs it; in the case of riot porn, it glorifies
the moment of physical conflict, while removing the social context that gives
it meaning. Pornography can promote roles that have little to do with the
actual needs of the participants; those who have been influenced by corporate
pornography sometimes make disappointing sexual partners. Likewise, a cynical
observer might caricature some current manifestations of insurrectionism as a
misguided attempt to distill a strategy from the aesthetic of riot porn: no
difficult negotiations with allies, no intermediate or long-term goals, only
the moment of attack, isolated in a vacuum.

Actual sex and violence can be reclaimed from patriarchal society, but in some
ways it is more challenging to reclaim *representations* of sex and
violence.[^65] Anybody can shoot a motherfucker, but in this society the image
of the gun is almost inextricably associated with notions of male power and
domination. Anti-authoritarians who think spectacular representations of
violence can be turned against their masters are playing with fire in more
ways than they think.

On the other hand, in a society in which so much privilege rests on violence
that occurs outside our immediate experience, it is commendable that
insurrectionists set out to establish a firsthand relationship to it. Perhaps
insurrectionist activity should be evaluated according to how effectively it
serves this project of deprogramming, no less than how much it costs the enemy
or inspires potential comrades. To what extent does a given action enable the
participants to achieve an unmediated and intentional relationship to
violence? To what extent is it simply a reprise of all-too-familiar scripts?
Just as we might judge erotic play or material by the extent to which it
“queers” sex rather than reinforcing conventional roles and power dynamics, we
might assess insurrectionist practice according to the extent to which it
*queers violence*. This could mean anything from empowering demographics who
do not normally have the opportunity to wield violence against their
oppressors[^66], to dispelling the influence of media representations of
violence by replacing them with a familiarity based in lived experience, to
making violence serve forbidden roles no one has yet imagined.

* * *

\redstart

The afternoon of the action, one older anarchist who hasn't participated in
the organizing expresses his usual irritation: “So the idea is to get the
fucking cops called, wait till they show up, and then try to march around?
These idiots have finally come up with a way to lose the element of
surprise, which is practically the only advantage of the tactic!”

But surprisingly or not, everything goes exactly according to plan. People
gather in the park for food and games, then at the appointed time depart in
small groups for the secret location. It turns out to be a spacious
abandoned building in the heart of downtown, with a great banner hanging
from the roof: “Reclaiming space to reclaim our lives: OCCUPY EVERYTHING.”
Party favors are distributed at the door—condoms, masks, a precious little
manifesto: “You see, here's the deal. We've recently started to realize that
we exist…” Inside, a dance party is in progress; the derelict
post-industrial decor has been beautified with streamers and another banner,
this one reading “PARTY LIKE IT'S 1886.” A couple gender dissidents have
taken off all their clothes. Others are exploring the margins of the
reclaimed building in ones and twos. Unlike the Reclaim the Streets[^67]
actions that swept the state a decade earlier, this is a private party, but
it has the same atmosphere of wonder.

After longer than expected, the news spreads from ear to ear: the police are
inside! The sound system cuts out and someone pulls it out the back door
just as an officer comes into sight, probing the crowd with his flashlight.
Everyone trickles out the front door in a single-file line; this feels
somewhat demoralizing, and the older anarchist grumbles that if they really
want to have a march they should be exiting in one determined block.
Instead, a hesitant crowd congeals on the sidewalk, dawdling as the
outnumbered police struggle to figure out what's going on.

The sound system reappears and people rally around it. Just as the crowd
begins to move down the street, a policeman rushes over and seizes it.
Everyone else continues; turning the corner, they miraculously find
themselves occupying the street in a world seemingly empty of authorities.
There is no precise cause or rallying cry for the evening, so the
participants—unable to dispense with activist traditions, despite some
rhetoric to the contrary—find themselves chanting the first catchphrases
that come to mind: “Swine flu!” “Wu Tang Clan ain't nothin' ta fuck with!”
Two young men out on the town join in, clearly not interpreting this as an
anarchist street party.

A block later hoods go up, masks come down, and the sound of grating metal
rings out as newspaper boxes are dragged into the street. Everyone else
around the country is abandoning corporate print media, but anarchists are
still passionately invested in their conviction that the boxes prevent
pursuit by police vehicles. The café district is around the next turn, and
chairs are sent flying against plate glass windows, only to bounce off and
fall to earth. There is an element of playacting in the demeanor of even the
wildest participants: they are striking poses, acting out their favorite
scenes without the grim determination to do *damage* that characterized the
famous black blocs of the anti-globalization era.

The legal risks, of course, are still very real—but the police are
mercifully far behind, and the crowd disperses before they can catch up.
Some participants are pleased with themselves; others are nonplussed. A
young hippy tries to initiate a conversation with a stern-faced fellow
tucking a sweatshirt under his arm: “Did you see those people throwing
chairs at windows? That's fucked, huh?” The one with the sweatshirt picks up
his pace and does not answer.

Afterwards, all the discussions from five years earlier begin again. Was it
irresponsible for some people to escalate to property destruction when
others didn't know it was coming? On the other hand, how are people supposed
to initiate participatory vandalism? You can't exactly put up fliers
announcing it. Did anyone aside from the participants understand the
point—and does that even matter? Is it pathetic that the would-be rioters
couldn't break the café windows? Or is it fortunate, as that might have
provoked a more serious follow-up inquiry without achieving any meaningful
objective? Few recognize these old questions—five years earlier, most people
were living elsewhere or involved in totally different things.

The grumpy older anarchist reminisces about the days when surprise marches
like this used to take place in his own community. The first one involved
hundreds of people, the majority of whom had never imagined themselves
parading without a permit; to his mortification, they chanted “What do we
want? PEACE!” when he would have preferred to raze the whole city to the
ground. Over the following years, each march became a little more aggressive
than the last; a small nucleus of committed clandestine organizers emerged,
while conflicts deepened within the broader social base that made the format
possible. The final action ended up on the national news, with tens of
thousands of dollars of damage done to a high-profile target and several
people standing trial for felonies. After that, everything dissolved in a
mix of angry recriminations, exhausting legal support, and prohibitive
security culture.

His friend asks if it was worth it. “Maybe,” he allows. “Like, everyone
blames the Spanish anarchists for losing the Spanish Civil War[^68], as if a
few kids in their twenties today could know the context better than they
did—but perhaps they knew they were doomed from the start, and were holding
it together as best they could in hopes of going out with a bang so they
could inspire people like us. If the movement we were part of wasn't going
to last forever, maybe it's for the best it ended the way it did, too. But
should you cut right to smashing shit when you're trying to get something
started? I don't know.”

\redstop

## Pretensions of Destroying Everything

Some contemporary insurrectionism affects a nihilist posture, proposing in an
offhand manner that everything that exists must be destroyed. To indigenous or
environmentalist ears, this project of universal destruction can sound
suspiciously like the program industrial capitalism is already carrying out.

As with the disavowal of subculture, it may make pretty rhetoric to say one is
against “everything,” but it doesn't make a lot of sense. Even opposing
everything is still a position adopted in this world, shaped by and proceeding
from the existing context. If we are against *everything*, how do we navigate?
Where do we start, and how can we be sure that the results of our efforts
won't be even worse? Can we make any stipulations about which direction to set
out in at all?

It makes more sense, and is more honest, to say that we side with some
existing beings and currents against others, and hope by doing so to effect a
total transformation of the world. Not only does this approach offer concrete
starting points, it also lends itself better to studying the intricate ways
hierarchical and horizontal dynamics intermingle in both the enemy's camp and
our own.[^69] If you can't see any good in your adversary, you probably won't
be able to recognize anything bad in yourself. By the same token, the idea
that everything has to be destroyed anyway can make it easy to excuse oneself
from criticism.

## Dynamiting the Fault Lines

![Clashes do not occur between groups so much as within societies. Every
society is made up of conflicting currents, which compete not only within
society as a whole but also within the individuals who constitute
it.](images/crimethincinsurrection/9.jpg)

Let's return once more to the context surrounding large-scale insurrections
such as the one that took place in Greece in December 2008[^70]. Militant
resistance is sustainable in such situations not only because of the
initiative of the immediate participants, but also because of the efforts of
non-anarchists who oppose military intervention, organize against legal
repression, and otherwise limit the options of the state. Many of these people
may also oppose the insurrection, even while playing essential roles in making
it possible. If social war were simply a matter of force meeting force, the
Greek government could have bombed all the squats and occupied universities
from which the revolt was organized; it could not do so because its hands were
tied by liberals, and for fear of turning liberals into radicals.

This is not to diminish the courage of those who meet the state in open
conflict, but to emphasize that clashes do not occur *between groups* so much
as *within societies*. Every society is made up of conflicting currents, which
compete not only within society as a whole but also within the individuals who
constitute it; the moments of rupture that take place within individuals are
no less important than those that take place between classes. The most
effective insurrectionist actions not only open up the fault lines that run
through society, they also compel the undecided to take sides—and to do so
according to their own interests, rather than those of their masters.

The outcome of revolutionary struggle is not decided by revolutionaries or
autocrats so much as by those who sit on the fence between them. The balance
of power is determined according to which side of the fence they come down on
when they are forced to choose. Revolutionaries ignore this at their peril.

## Infrastructure ~~versus~~ Equals Confrontation

Liberals and others who oppose revolutionary struggle often pose a false
dichotomy between connecting with the community and engaging in militant
confrontation. Some insurrectionists have accepted this dichotomy at face
value, arguing for the latter in place of—perhaps in despair of—the former.
Ten years ago, militant anarchists argued against the conceptual framework of
violence “versus” non-violence; now the pendulum has swung to the opposite
extreme, and it is insurrectionists who insist that *attack* is distinct from
community organizing.

On the contrary, “community organizing” and taking the offensive are at their
most effective when they are identical. Permanent conflict, decentralized
organization, and all the other insurrectionist precepts can serve quite well
in local, community-based struggles.[^71] Combining infrastructural and
confrontational approaches does not mean volunteering at an infoshop during
the day and smashing bank windows at night, but rather synthesizing the two
into a single project. This is not complicated—as the whole world has been
taken from us, we need only seize back any one of the things that should be
ours and we enter into conflict with the state. If anarchists do not undertake
this more often, perhaps it is because it is always most frightening to
attempt what one wants most, what one knows one should have been doing all
along.

Is there an empty lot that should be a community garden? Turn it into one, and
mobilize enough social force that the owner finds it most convenient to leave
you be. Is a coworker being harassed or laid off? Bring the full power of your
community to bear against her employer. Are there resources at the grocery
store or the university that would be better off in your neighborhood? Figure
out whom you can trust and how to distribute them, and *take them*[^72]. To
win these engagements, you'll have to spend a lot more time building up
relationships and credibility than running around with masks on—but there are
no shortcuts in social war.

This is nothing less than the project of *beginning our lives*, eternally
deferred with all manner of half-hearted excuses and tortuous theoretical
justifications. In our real lives, we are warriors who fight for ourselves and
each other, who seize back the territory of our day-to-day existence or else
die trying. Nothing less is worthy of us.

It is neither persuasion to abstract ideas nor class position alone that makes
people invest themselves in the struggle against hierarchy. It is the
*experience* of anarchist solutions to the problems of life, the development
and fulfillment of anarchic desires. The need to revolt, to destroy, to get
revenge is one such need; if insurrectionist approaches can fulfill it, so
much the better. But we deserve a resistance that fulfills all our needs, and
*all* our dreams besides.

![](images/crimethincinsurrection/10.gif)

* * *

\redstart

Returning from the riots in Gothenburg during the 2001 summit of the
European Union, activists in Stockholm begin casting around for ways to
initiate struggles closer to home. At first, the prospect is overwhelming:
when you're trying to confront the system in its entirety, where do you
start?

Meanwhile, the rates in the Stockholm subway increase from 450 kronor to
500\. One day, perhaps en route to a meeting, a young activist narrowly
escapes being ticketed for fare evasion. Like most of her friends, she
simply can't afford the new rates, and has to risk her luck leaping the
turnstile every time she goes out. Most of the time she gets away with
it—but if they catch her next time, it will cost 1200 kronor.

She reflects on how many others must share her plight, each waging an
individual guerrilla war against the transportation authorities. There's a
union for everything in Sweden, it seems—but when it comes to the day-to-day
tactics by which people actually survive, they still have to go it alone.

There's an idea. A fare-dodgers union[^73].

Hundreds of people join up. The dues are 100 kronor a month, a savings of
80% on the government rate for transportation, and if you get busted the
union pays your fine. More importantly, fare dodging is no longer an
isolated activity, but a collective revolt. Fare-dodgers see themselves as a
social force, taking pride in their actions and inviting others to join in;
the union also warns commuters of the movements of ticket enforcers, giving
them added incentives to skip the fares even if they don't become
dues-paying members. Rather than trying to persuade others to join in their
activism, the founders of the union have found a way to bring people
together on the basis of the resistance they were already engaged in: now
every fare-dodger is a potential revolutionary, and *sees herself* as one.

After a few months have passed and a few members have been busted for
evasion, it turns out that the union is operating at a profit. With the
extra funds, the organizers produce glossy propaganda urging the public to
join them in an all-out war on public transportation fees, and begin
brainstorming about their next step. What other fault lines run through
Swedish society? How can other individual revolts be transformed into
collective power—not in order to bargain with the authorities, but to defy
them?

*[For more on the fare-dodgers' union, see www.planka.nu.]*

\redstop

## Anarchism without Adjectives

> “There are no such things as superior forms of struggle.\
> Revolt needs everything: papers and books, arms and explosives… The only
> interesting question is how to combine them.” — At Daggers Drawn[^74]

If we have never called ourselves insurrectionists, it is not because we do
not wish for insurrection, but because our own temperament predisposes us to
an *anarchism without adjectives*[^75]. The important thing is to fight for
freedom and against hierarchy; we imagine that this will demand different
approaches in different situations, and that these approaches may need one
another to succeed. We are anarcho-syndicalists[^76] on the shop floor, green
anarchists in the woods[^77], social anarchists[^78] in our communities,
individualists[^79] when you catch us alone, anarcho-communists[^80] when
there's something to share, insurrectionists[^81] when we strike a blow.

Anarchism without adjectives not only refuses to prioritize one approach over
the others, but emphasizes the importance of each aspect of anarchism to its
supposed opposites. The riot needs the bake sale to be repeatable; the arson
needs the public campaign to be intelligible; the supermarket heist needs the
neighborhood grocery distribution to pass on the goods.

All dichotomies are false dichotomies to some extent, masking not only the
common threads between the terms but also the *other* dichotomies one might
experiment with instead. On close inspection, successful insurrectionism seems
to depend so much on “community building” and even “lifestyle anarchism[^82]”
as to be virtually indistinguishable in practice. If we retired this
particular distinction, what other distinctions might arise in its place? What
other questions might we ask?

All this is not to say that individual anarchists can't focus on their
particular skills and preferred strategies—simply that it is an error to frame
anyone's personal preferences as universals. In the end, as always, it comes
down to a question of which problems you want to wrestle with, which
shortcomings you feel most equipped to overcome. Do you prefer to struggle
against invisible hierarchies in informal networks, or brave the stultifying
inertia of formal organizations? Would you rather risk acting rashly, or not
acting at all? Which is more important to you, security or visibility—and
which do you think will keep you safer in the long run?

We can't tell anyone which problems to choose. We can only do our best to
outline them. Best of luck in your insurrections—may they intersect with ours.

![](images/crimethincinsurrection/11.gif)

[^1]: [http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Insurrectionary\_anarchism](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Insurrectionary_anarchism)

[^2]: [http://www.crimethinc.com/texts/atoz/shoplifting.php](http://www.crimethinc.com/texts/atoz/shoplifting.php)

[^3]: [http://www.crimethinc.com/texts/recentfeatures/g20.php](http://www.crimethinc.com/texts/recentfeatures/g20.php)

[^4]: [http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Karl\_Marx](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Karl_Marx)

[^5]: [http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mikhail\_Bakunin](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mikhail_Bakunin)

[^6]: [http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Paris\_Commune](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Paris_Commune)

[^7]: [http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Propaganda\_of\_the\_deed](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Propaganda_of_the_deed)

[^8]: [http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Propaganda\_of\_the\_deed\#List\_of\_assassinated\_important\_figures\_and\_other\_propaganda\_by\_the\_deed\_acts](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Propaganda_of_the_deed#List_of_assassinated_important_figures_and_other_propaganda_by_the_deed_acts)

[^9]: [http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Illegalism](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Illegalism)

[^10]: [http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Jules\_Bonnot](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Jules_Bonnot)

[^11]: [http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Errico\_Malatesta](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Errico_Malatesta)

[^12]: [http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Luigi\_Galleani](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Luigi_Galleani)

[^13]: [http://theanarchistlibrary.org/authors/Alfredo\_M\_\_Bonanno.html](http://theanarchistlibrary.org/authors/Alfredo_M__Bonanno.html)

[^14]: [http://www.librarything.com/author/weirjean](http://www.librarything.com/author/weirjean)

[^15]: [http://www.eco-action.org/dod/no10/anarchy.htm](http://www.eco-action.org/dod/no10/anarchy.htm)

[^16]: [http://www.eco-action.org/dod/no10/](http://www.eco-action.org/dod/no10/)

[^17]: [http://www.eco-action.org/dod/no10/anarchy.htm](http://www.eco-action.org/dod/no10/anarchy.htm)

[^18]: [http://theanarchistlibrary.org/HTML/Alfredo\_M.\_Bonanno\_\_The\_Insurrectional\_Project.html](http://theanarchistlibrary.org/HTML/Alfredo_M._Bonanno__The_Insurrectional_Project.html)

[^19]: [http://crimethinc.com/texts/days/nogods.php](http://crimethinc.com/texts/days/nogods.php)

[^20]: [http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Years\_of\_lead\_(Italy)](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Years_of_lead_(Italy))

[^21]: [http://theanarchistlibrary.org/HTML/Alfredo\_M.\_Bonanno\_\_Armed\_Joy.html](http://theanarchistlibrary.org/HTML/Alfredo_M._Bonanno__Armed_Joy.html)

[^22]: [http://www.indybay.org/newsitems/2009/05/03/18592657.php](http://www.indybay.org/newsitems/2009/05/03/18592657.php)

[^23]: [http://theanarchistlibrary.org/HTML/ACME\_Collective\_\_N30\_Black\_Bloc\_Communique.html](http://theanarchistlibrary.org/HTML/ACME_Collective__N30_Black_Bloc_Communique.html)

[^24]: [http://www.crimethinc.com/texts/pastfeatures/blocs.php](http://www.crimethinc.com/texts/pastfeatures/blocs.php)

[^25]: [http://www.crimethinc.com/blog/2006/11/30/seattle-seven-years-later/](http://www.crimethinc.com/blog/2006/11/30/seattle-seven-years-later/)

[^26]: [http://tarnac9.wordpress.com/texts/the-coming-insurrection/](http://tarnac9.wordpress.com/texts/the-coming-insurrection/)

[^27]: [http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/John\_Zerzan](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/John_Zerzan)

[^28]: [http://www.crimethinc.com/rt/](http://www.crimethinc.com/rt/)

[^29]: [http://www.crimethinc.com/books/days.html](http://www.crimethinc.com/books/days.html)

[^30]: [http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Straight\_edge](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Straight_edge)

[^31]: [http://news.infoshop.org/article.php?story=20060610134717980](http://news.infoshop.org/article.php?story=20060610134717980)

[^32]: [http://www.anarkismo.net/article/3430](http://www.anarkismo.net/article/3430)

[^33]: [http://www.revoltagainstplenty.com/index.php/archive/16-archive-global/58-os-cangaceiros](http://www.revoltagainstplenty.com/index.php/archive/16-archive-global/58-os-cangaceiros)

[^34]: [http://news.infoshop.org/article.php?story=20090604211215180](http://news.infoshop.org/article.php?story=20090604211215180)

[^35]: [http://www.theanarchistlibrary.org/HTML/Anonymous\_\_At\_Daggers\_Drawn\_with\_the\_Existent\_\_its\_Defenders\_and\_its\_False\_Critics.html](http://www.theanarchistlibrary.org/HTML/Anonymous__At_Daggers_Drawn_with_the_Existent__its_Defenders_and_its_False_Critics.html)

[^36]: Assuming common cause with others of unknown political commitments on
    the basis of their apparently subversive actions is risky on multiple
    levels. The Situationists used the Watts riots to argue that their ideas
    were “already in everyone's heads” at best, that was a stretch, and at
    worst a way to claim the right to speak for those who could only speak on
    their own behalf through action. We can celebrate rebellious actions from
    outside our communities, but meaningful alliances demand actual
    relationships.

[^37]: [http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Kristallnacht](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Kristallnacht)

[^38]: [http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Iranian\_Revolution](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Iranian_Revolution)

[^39]: [http://theanarchistlibrary.org/HTML/Andrew\_X\_\_Give\_Up\_Activism.html](http://theanarchistlibrary.org/HTML/Andrew_X__Give_Up_Activism.html)

[^40]: [http://www.booksthroughbars.org/pbp/](http://www.booksthroughbars.org/pbp/)

[^41]:
    > “It is better to loot than to shoplift, to ambush than to snipe, to
    > walk out than to phone in a bomb threat, to strike than to call in sick,
    > to riot than to vandalize… Increasingly collective and coordinated acts
    > against this world of coercion and isolation aren’t solely a matter of
    > effectivity, but equally a matter of sociality—of community and fun.”
    >
    > — War on Misery \#3

[^42]: [http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Squatting\#Europe](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Squatting#Europe)

[^43]: [http://rnc8.org/](http://rnc8.org/)

[^44]: [http://crimethinc.com/texts/recentfeatures/rncdnc.php](http://crimethinc.com/texts/recentfeatures/rncdnc.php)

[^45]: [http://www.eco-action.org/dod/no10/anarchy.htm](http://www.eco-action.org/dod/no10/anarchy.htm)

[^46]: [http://www.crimethinc.com/texts/recentfeatures/greenscared.php](http://www.crimethinc.com/texts/recentfeatures/greenscared.php)

[^47]: It’s worth noting that the only Operation Backfire defendants who
    conducted themselves honorably were the ones who were still involved in
    activist organizing or subcultural communities.

[^48]: [http://tarnac9.wordpress.com/](http://tarnac9.wordpress.com/)

[^49]: [http://tarnac9.wordpress.com/texts/the-coming-insurrection/](http://tarnac9.wordpress.com/texts/the-coming-insurrection/)

[^50]: [http://www.theanarchistlibrary.org/HTML/Anonymous\_\_At\_Daggers\_Drawn\_with\_the\_Existent\_\_its\_Defenders\_and\_its\_False\_Critics.html](http://www.theanarchistlibrary.org/HTML/Anonymous__At_Daggers_Drawn_with_the_Existent__its_Defenders_and_its_False_Critics.html)

[^51]: [http://theanarchistlibrary.org/HTML/Peter\_Gelderloos\_\_Insurrection\_vs.\_Organization.html](http://theanarchistlibrary.org/HTML/Peter_Gelderloos__Insurrection_vs._Organization.html)

[^52]: [http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Students\_for\_a\_Democratic\_Society\_(1960\_organization)](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Students_for_a_Democratic_Society_(1960_organization))

[^53]: [http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Weather\_Underground](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Weather_Underground)

[^54]: [http://thing.desk.nl/bilwet/Cracking/contents.html](http://thing.desk.nl/bilwet/Cracking/contents.html)

[^55]: [http://theanarchistlibrary.org/HTML/ACME\_Collective\_\_N30\_Black\_Bloc\_Communique.html](http://theanarchistlibrary.org/HTML/ACME_Collective__N30_Black_Bloc_Communique.html)

[^56]: [http://www.crimethinc.com/texts/recentfeatures/whattoexpect.php\#historical](http://www.crimethinc.com/texts/recentfeatures/whattoexpect.php#historical)

[^57]: [http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Quebec\_City\_protest](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Quebec_City_protest)

[^58]: [http://www.crimethinc.com/texts/recentfeatures/greenscared.php](http://www.crimethinc.com/texts/recentfeatures/greenscared.php)

[^59]: Some critics challenge the right of a predominantly white or male
    demographic to initiate confrontations in the first place; but people of
    all walks of life are entitled to fight for liberation on their own
    behalf, so long as they don’t do so in a way that compromises others. The
    details of initiating confrontations without compromising others are
    complicated enough that it would demand an analysis even longer than this
    one to explore them.

[^60]: [http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Agamben](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Agamben)

[^61]: [http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Michel\_Foucault](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Michel_Foucault)

[^62]: [http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Antonio\_Negri](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Antonio_Negri)

[^63]: [http://zinelibrary.info/files/TD3imp.pdf](http://zinelibrary.info/files/TD3imp.pdf)

[^64]: Not all insurrectionists fit this demographic, of course—but there
    might be a few who do.

[^65]: Speaking of representation, white anarchists must be careful not to
    exoticize and eroticize violence in poor communities of color. This
    already occurs in hip hop consumerism, where racist capitalists kill two
    birds with one stone by profiting off representations of black people as
    violent and oversexed. Suburban insurrectionists pining for comrades may
    unconsciously picture stereotypical characters from hip hop videos as
    their class allies in the social war.

[^66]: [http://bashbacknews.wordpress.com/2009/09/26/queer-anarchists-makes-total-destroy-at-the-g20-summit/](http://bashbacknews.wordpress.com/2009/09/26/queer-anarchists-makes-total-destroy-at-the-g20-summit/)

[^67]: [http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Reclaim\_the\_Streets](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Reclaim_the_Streets)

[^68]: [http://flag.blackened.net/revolt/spaindx.html](http://flag.blackened.net/revolt/spaindx.html)

[^69]: Contrast this with the facile opposition to “civilization,” case
    closed, adopted by hard-line primitivists.

[^70]: [http://crimethinc.com/blog/2008/12/20/greece-and-the-insurrections-to-come/](http://crimethinc.com/blog/2008/12/20/greece-and-the-insurrections-to-come/)

[^71]: For example, one of the classic cases of insurrectionist practice
    referenced by Alfredo Bonanno was a campaign to prevent the construction
    of a US missile base in Comiso, Italy. Anarchists helped form autonomous
    groups in the community, which were not ideologically identified but
    functioned according to insurrectionist principles, on the basis of a
    commitment to stop the construction by any means necessary.

[^72]: [http://news.infoshop.org/article.php?story=20060508223435549](http://news.infoshop.org/article.php?story=20060508223435549)

[^73]: [http://news.infoshop.org/article.php?story=2008sweden-fare-dodging](http://news.infoshop.org/article.php?story=2008sweden-fare-dodging)

[^74]: [http://www.theanarchistlibrary.org/HTML/Anonymous\_\_At\_Daggers\_Drawn\_with\_the\_Existent\_\_its\_Defenders\_and\_its\_False\_Critics.html](http://www.theanarchistlibrary.org/HTML/Anonymous__At_Daggers_Drawn_with_the_Existent__its_Defenders_and_its_False_Critics.html)

[^75]: [http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Anarchism\_without\_adjectives](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Anarchism_without_adjectives)

[^76]: [http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Anarcho-syndicalism](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Anarcho-syndicalism)

[^77]: [http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Green\_anarchism](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Green_anarchism)

[^78]: [http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Social\_anarchism](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Social_anarchism)

[^79]: [http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Individualist\_anarchism](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Individualist_anarchism)

[^80]: [http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Anarchist\_communism](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Anarchist_communism)

[^81]: [http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Insurrectionary\_anarchism](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Insurrectionary_anarchism)

[^82]: [http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lifestyle\_anarchism](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lifestyle_anarchism)
