% Marcuse and the Quest for Radical Subjectivity
% Douglas Kellner
% 1999

## Introduction

The past decades have witnessed a relentless philosophical assault on the
concept of the subject, once the alpha and omega of modern philosophy.
Materialists have decried the idealist and essentialist dimensions of the
traditional concept of the subject in its various Cartesian, Kantian, and
other philosophical forms. More recently, poststructuralist and postmodern
theorists have attacked the universalizing pretensions of subject discourse,
its positing of a (false) unity, its assuming a centered and grounded status
as a linchpin for philosophical systems or knowledge-claims, and its
transparent self-certainty from Descartes' cogito to Husserl's phenomenology.
Following Nietzsche, poststructuralists have seen the subject as an effect of
language, constructed in accord with the forms of grammar (i.e.
subject/predicate) and existing linguistic systems, or, with Deleuze, have
privileged the flux and flow of bodily experience over more idealist
conceptions of consciousness and the self.

For traditional philosophy, the subject was unitary, ideal, universal,
self-grounded, asexual and the foundation for knowledge and philosophy, while
for the poststructuralist and postmodern critique the human being is
corporeal, gendered, social, fractured, and historical with subjectivity
radically decentered as an effect of language, society, culture, and history.
Yet if the construction of the subject in language, the social, and nature is
the key mark of a poststructuralist or postmodern conception of subjectivity,
then the Frankfurt School analyses are not antithetical to such conceptions.
The entire tradition of critical theory — which draws on Hegel, Marx,
Nietzsche, Freud, and Weber — posits the historical and social construction of
the individual, and members of this tradition can be read as providing aspects
of theorizing the social construction of subjectivity in language, social
interaction, and culture in specific historical contexts. Habermas in
particular has followed this motif and has attacked the philosophy of the
subject, while proposing replacing its subject/object model with an ego-alter
model that is based upon the ideal of communicative reason[^1].

In this paper, however, I want to pursue Herbert Marcuse's sharp critiques of
the rationalist subject of modern philosophy which he counterposes to notions
of libidinal rationality, eros, and the aesthetic-erotic dimensions of an
embodied subjectivity. Marcuse is part of a historicist tradition of critical
theory which rejects essentialism and sees subjectivity developing in history,
in interaction with specific socio-political conditions. Following Adorno and
Horkheimer and the earlier Frankfurt School tradition, Marcuse also sees
dominant forms of subjectivity as oppressive and constraining, while
challenging us to reconstruct subjectivity and to develop a new sensibility,
qualitatively different than the normalized subjectivity of contemporary
advanced industrial societies. In particular, Marcuse was engaged in a
life-long search for a revolutionary subjectivity, for a sensibility that
would revolt against the existing society and attempt to create a new one.

Hence, I will argue that Marcuse and the Frankfurt School contribute important
perspectives for criticizing the traditional concept of the subject and for
rethinking and reconceptualizing subjectivity to develop conceptions potent
enough to meet poststructuralist, postmodern, materialist, feminist, and other
forms of critique. Crucially, the assault on the subject has had serious
consequences, for without a robust notion of subjectivity and agency there is
no refuge for individual freedom and liberation, no locus of struggle and
opposition, and no agency for progressive political transformation. For these
reasons, theorists from diverse camps, including feminists, multiculturalists,
and poststructuralists who have had second thoughts about the all-too-hasty
dissolution of the subject, have attempted to rehabilitate constructive
notions of subjectivity and agency, in the light of contemporary critique.

My argument is that the Marcuse anticipates the post-structuralist critique of
the subject, that these critiques suggest that the traditional concept of the
subject contains too much philosophical and political baggage, and that we
need a reconstructed notion of subjectivity which Marcuse and the Frankfurt
School helped initiate and enabled us to further develop. In drawing on
Nietzsche, Freud, and aesthetic modernism, Marcuse posits a bodily, erotic,
gendered, social, and aestheticized subjectivity that overcomes mind-body
dualism, avoids idealist and rationalist essentialism, and is constructed in a
specific social milieu. Moreover, Marcusean subjectivity is challenged to
reconstruct itself and emancipate itself from limited and oppressive forms and
to pursue the project of cultivating a new sensibility. In delineating
Marcuse's reconstruction of subjectivity, I'll first offer a re-reading of
Eros and Civilization to demonstrate how it anticipates the poststructuralist
critique of the subject and offers an alternative conception of subjectivity.
Then I pursue some of the contributions to rethinking subjectivity in
Marcuse's later writings, focusing on his notion of the new sensibility and
aesthetic education. At stake is developing a reconstructed Marcusean theory
of subjectivity which emphasizes the need for a transformation of the
affective dimension, the sensibility, and our very notion of subjectivity to
help create new conceptions of subjectivity and to provide conceptions of the
subjective conditions for radical social change and of agency in order to
promote individual and social transformation.

## Re-Reading Eros and Civilization

In *Eros and Civilization*, Marcuse draws on Freud to depict the social
construction of subjectivity in the dramatic clash between the pleasure
principle and the reality principle. For Freud, the instincts are originally
governed by the pleasure principle: they aim solely at “gaining pleasure; from
any operation which might arouse unpleasantness (“pain”) mental activity draws
back” (*E&C* 13). From early on, however, the pleasure principle comes into
conflict with a harsh environment and after a series of disciplinary
experiences, “the individual comes to the traumatic realization that full and
painless gratification of his needs is impossible” (*E&C* 13). Under the
tutelage of the reality principle, the person learns what is useful and
approved behavior, and what is harmful and forbidden. In this way, one
develops one's rational faculties, becoming “a conscious, thinking *subject*,
geared to a rationality which is imposed on him from outside” (*E&C* 14).

For Marcuse, then, rationality is a social construct and subjectivity is a
product of social experience. Thus, like Foucault, Marcuse sees subjectivity
not as a natural and metaphysical substance, pre-existing its social
gestation, but as a product of societal normalization, whereby the individual
is subjected to rationalizing forms of thought and behavior. According to
Marcuse's conception, the reality principle enforces the totality of society's
requirements, norms and prohibitions which are imposed upon the individual
from “outside.” This process constitutes for him a domination of the
individual by society which shapes thought and behavior, desires and needs,
language and consciousness. In Marcuse's words: “neither his desires nor his
alteration of reality are henceforth his own: they are now ‘organized’ by his
society. And this ‘organization’ represses and transsubstantiates his original
instinctual needs” (*E&C* 14–15).

Marcuse employs Freud's theory to produce an account of how society comes to
dominate the individual, how social control is internalized, and how
conformity ensues. He concludes that “Freud's individual psychology is in its
very essence social psychology” (*E&C* 16), and he repeatedly emphasizes that
Freud's psychological categories are historical and political in nature.
Hence, Marcuse boldly fleshes out the “political and sociological substance of
Freud's theory” to develop what I call a *critical theory of socialization*.
Whereas most theories of socialization stress its humanizing aspects by
claiming that socialization makes individuals more “human” — and thus
legitimate dominant social institutions and practices — Freud exposes the
repressive content of Western civilization and the heavy price paid for its
“progress.” Although industrialization has resulted in material progress,
Freud's analysis of the instinctual renunciations and unhappiness it has
produced raises the question of whether our form of civilization is worth the
suffering and misery (*E&C* 3ff). In Marcuse's view, Freud's account of
civilization and its discontents puts in question the whole ideology of
progress, productivity and the work ethic, as well as religion and morality,
by “showing up the repressive content of the highest values and achievements
of culture” (*E&C* 17).

Thus, Marcuse, like Foucault, stresses the social construction of subjectivity
and the ways that subjectification (i.e. the ways of producing a socially
submissive subject) are involved in a process of domination. But whereas
Foucault and many poststructuralists call for resistance to domination, they
often have no theoretical resources to construct a notion of agency that would
efficaciously resist repression and domination[^2]. For Marcuse, however,
there is a “hidden trend in psychoanalysis” which discloses those aspects of
human nature that oppose the dominant ethic of labor and renunciation, while
upholding “the tabooed aspirations of humanity”: the demands of the pleasure
principle for gratification and absence of restraint (*E&C* 18). He argues
that Freud's instinct theory contains a “depth dimension” which suggests that
our instincts strive for a condition in which freedom and happiness converge,
in which we fulfill our needs, and strive to overcome repression and
domination. For Marcuse, *memory* contains images of gratification and can
play a cognitive and therapeutic role in mental life: “Its' truth value lies
in the specific function of memory to preserve promises and potentialities
which are betrayed and even outlawed by the mature, civilized individual, but
which had once been fulfilled in the dim past and which are never entirely
forgotten” (*E&C* 18–19).

Marcuse subtly reformulates the therapeutic role of memory stressed in
psychoanalysis. In Freud's theory, the suppression of memory takes place
through the repression of unpleasant or traumatic experiences, which are
usually concerned with sexuality or aggression; the task of psychoanalysis is
to free the patient from the burden or repressed, traumatic memories — whose
repression often produces neurosis — by providing understanding and insight
that would enable the individual to work through painful experiences of the
past and to dissolve neurotic behavior. Although Marcuse preserves the
psychoanalytic linkage between forgetting and repression, he stresses the
liberating potentialities of memory and recollection of pleasurable or
euphoric experiences, as well as the unpleasant or traumatic experiences
stressed by Freud.

In his reconstruction of Freud, Marcuse suggests that remembrance of past
experiences of freedom and happiness could put into question the painful
performances of alienated labor and manifold oppressions of everyday life.
These memories are embedded in individual experiences of a happier past and
historical conditions that offered more and better freedom, gratification, and
happiness. Marcuse will link these emancipatory dimensions of memory with
phantasy and will argue that both human beings and their cultural tradition
contain resources that can be mobilized against suffering and oppression in
the present.

Memory for Marcuse thus re-members, reconstructs, experience, going to the
past to construct future images of freedom and happiness. Whereas romanticism
is past-oriented, remembering the joys of nature and the past in the face of
the onslaught of industrialization, Marcuse is future-oriented, looking to the
past to construct a better future. Marcuse's analysis implies that society
trains the individual for the systematic repression of those emancipatory
memories, and devalues experiences guided solely by the pleasure principle.
Following Nietzsche in the *Genealogy of Morals*, Marcuse criticizes “the
one-sidedness of memory-training in civilization: the faculty was chiefly
directed towards remembering duties rather than pleasures; memory was linked
with bad conscience, guilt and sin. Unhappiness and the threat of punishment,
not happiness and the promise of freedom, linger in the memory” (*E&C* 232).

Marcuse claims that for Freud “phantasy” is a crucial mode of
“thought-activity” that is split off from the reality-principle (*E&C* 14,
140ff). For Freud, phantasy “was kept free from reality-testing and remained
subordinated to the pleasure principle alone. This is the act of
phantasy-making (das Phantasieren), which begins already with the game of
children, and later, continued as day-dreaming, abandons its dependence on
real objects” (*E&C* 140). Building on this conception, Marcuse suggests that
“phantasy” — in day-dreaming, dreams at night, play, and its embodiments in
art — can project images of integral gratification, pleasure, and
reconciliation, often denied in everyday life.

Hence, along with memory, Marcuse argues that phantasy can imagine another
world and generate images of a better life by speaking the language of the
pleasure principle and its demands for gratification. He stresses the
importance of great art for liberation because it refuses “to accept as final
the limitations imposed upon freedom and happiness by the reality principle
(*E&C* 149). Art for Marcuse practices the “Great Refusal,” incarnating the
emancipatory contents of memory, phantasy, and the imagination through
producing images of happiness and a life without anxiety. In Marcuse's view,
phantasies and hopes embody the eruption of desires for increased freedom and
gratification. The unconscious on this account contains the memory of integral
gratification experienced in the womb, in childhood, and in peak experiences
during one's life. Marcuse holds that the “psychoanalytic liberation of
memory” and “restoration of phantasy” provide access to experiences of
happiness and freedom which are subversive of the present life. He suggests
that Freud's theory of human nature, far from refuting the possibility of a
non-repressive civilization, indicates that there are aspects of human nature
that are striving for happiness and freedom.

In defending the claims of the pleasure principle, Marcuse believes that he is
remaining true to a materialism which takes seriously material needs and their
satisfaction, and the biological “depth-dimension” of human nature. In his
view, defence of the validity of the claims of the pleasure principle has
critical-revolutionary import in that Freud's analysis implies that the human
being can only tolerate so much repression and unhappiness, and when this
point is passed the individual will rebel against the conditions of
repression. Freud's theory thus contains elements of an *anthropology of
liberation* which analyses those aspects of human nature that furnish the
potential for radical opposition to the prevailing society.

Marcuse concludes that Freud's theory contains implications that have been
covered over, or neglected, and which he wishes to restore in their most
provocative form. He argues that this requires a restoration of Freud's
instinct theory, preserving his claims for the importance of sexuality and
acknowledgment of its vital and explosive claims. Neo-Freudians who deny the
primacy of sexuality have, in Marcuse's view, repressed Freud's deep insights
into human sexual being by relegating sexual instincts to a secondary place in
their theory (*E&C* 238ff). Marcuse believes that Freud's theory discloses the
depth and power of instinctual energies which contain untapped emancipatory
potential. He describes these instinctual energies which seek pleasure and
gratification as “Eros.” A liberated Eros, Marcuse claims, would release
energies that would not only seek sexual gratification, but would flow over
into expanded human relations and more abundant creativity. The released Eros
would desire, he suggests, a pleasurable aesthetic-erotic environment
requiring a total restructuring of human life and the material conditions of
existence.

In addition, Marcuse also accepts Freud's concept of Thanatos, the death
instinct, as well as the Freudian notion of “the political economy of the
instincts,” in which strengthening the life instincts enable Eros to control
and master Thanatos, and so to increase freedom and happiness, while
diminishing aggression and destruction. Thus, surprisingly, Marcuse adopts a
rather mechanistic concept of the instincts, building on Freud's biologistic
energy-instinct model — which has been sharply criticized and rejected both
within various circles of psychoanalytic theory, as well as within critical
theory (Habermas and his students) and poststructuralism. I believe, however,
that one can construct a Marcusean theory of subjectivity without deploying
the problematic aspects of Freud's instinct theory.

The key to Marcuse's reconstruction of the concept of subjectivity, I would
suggest, is the “Philosophical Interlude” in E&C in which he develops a
critical analysis of the presuppositions of Western rationality and its
concept of the philosophical subject. Marcuse claims that the prevalent
reality principle of Western civilization presupposes an antagonism between
subject and object, mind and body, reason and the passions, and the individual
and society. Nature is experienced on this basis as raw material to be
mastered, as an object of domination, as provocation or resistance to be
overpowered (*E&C* 110). The ego in Western thought is thus conceptualized as
an aggressive, offensive subject, fighting and striving to conquer the
resistant world. Through labor, the subject seeks continually to extend its
power and control over nature. The Logos of this reality principle is, Marcuse
argues, a logic of domination that finds its culmination in the reality
principle of advanced industrial society, the performance principle. The
performance principle is hostile to the senses and receptive faculties that
strive for gratification and fulfillment. It contains a concept of repressive
reason which seeks to tame instinctual drives for pleasure and enjoyment. Its
values, which are the governing norms of modern societies, include:

> “[…] profitable productivity, assertiveness, efficiency, competitiveness; in
> other words, the Performance Principle, the rule of functional rationality
> discriminating against emotions, a dual morality, the ‘work ethic,’ which
> means for the vast majority of the population condemnation to alienated and
> inhuman labor, and the will to power, the display of strength, virility
> (*M&F* 282).

This hegemonic version of the reality principle has been challenged, Marcuse
argues, from the beginning of Western philosophy. Against the antagonistic
struggle between subject and object, an opposing ideal of reconciliation and
harmony has been formulated, in which the individual strives for fulfillment
and gratification. This ‘Logos of gratification,’ Marcuse suggests, is found
in Aristotle's notion of the *nous theos* and Hegel's ideal of spirit coming
to rest and fruition in absolute knowledge (*E&C* 112ff). In these
philosophical conceptions, the human being is to attain a condition of
reconciliation after a process of struggle, suffering and labor, in which
alienation and oppression are finally overcome. Schopenhauer advocates a
similar idea of the restless, ever-striving “will” seeking peaceful Nirvana.
In addition, Marcuse finds a logic of gratification and different conception
of subjectivity in Nietzsche's emphasis on the body, the passions, joy and
liberation from time and guilt (*E&C* 119f). The values affirmed in this
reality principle would be the antithesis of the repressive performance
principle and its dominating subject and would affirm

> “[…] receptivity, sensitivity, non-violence, tenderness, and so on. These
> characteristic appear indeed as opposites of domination and exploitation. On
> the primary psychological level, they would pertain to the domain of Eros,
> they would express the energy of the life instincts against the death
> instinct and destructive energy.” (*M&F* 284)

This alternative reality principle and conception of subjectivity also finds
expression in Freud's notion of the Nirvana principle, which holds that all
instincts aim at rest, quiescence and the absence of pain (*E&C* 5ff and
124ff). In addition, Marcuse draws on Schiller's conception of aesthetic
education and play, arguing that in aesthetic and erotic experience, play, and
fantasy, the conflict between reason and the senses would be overcome so that
“reason is sensuous and sensuousness rational” (*E&C* 180). Operating through
the play impulse the aesthetic function would ‘abolish compulsion, and place
man, both morally and physically in freedom.’ It would harmonize the feelings
and affections with the ideas of reason, deprive the ‘laws of reason of their
moral compulsion’ and ‘reconciles them with the interest of the senses’ (*E&C*
182). In the language of poststructuralism, Marcuse thus envisages an embodied
subjectivity in which the opposition between reason and the senses, central to
the modern philosophical concept of the subject, is deconstructed. For
Schiller and Marcuse, the play impulse is connected with the aesthetic
function which would mediate between the passive, receptive “sensuous impulse'
and the active creative “form impulse,” thus reconciling reason and the
senses. The play impulse aspires to a condition of freedom from restraint and
anxiety, involving “freedom from the established reality: man is free when the
‘reality loses its seriousness’ and when its necessity ‘becomes light’” (*E&C*
187). This “freedom to play” and to create an “aesthetic reality” requires
liberation of the senses and, as both Schiller and Marcuse called for, “a
total revolution in the mode of perception and feeling” (*E&C* 189).

The resultant conception of an aestheticized and eroticized subjectivity
preserves the connotation of *Sinnlichkeit* as pertaining to sensuality,
receptiveness, art and eros, thus redeeming the body and the senses against
the tyranny of repressive reason and affirming the importance of aesthetics,
play, and erotic activity in human life. Hence, against the rational and
domineering subject of mastery, Marcuse advances a notion of subjectivity as
mediating reason and the senses, as seeking harmony and gratification. Thus,
he affirms an intersubjective ideal of a libidinal subjectivity in harmonious
and gratifying relations with others and, one might add, with nature itself.
Instead of controlling and dominating objects, Marcusean subjectivity seeks
gratifying and peaceful relations with others and with the external world.

Moreover, Marcuse proposes a new concept of reason which he describes as
“libidinal rationality” (*E&C* 223ff). In this conception reason is not
repressive of the senses, but acts in harmony with them, helping to find
objects of gratification and to cultivate and enhance sensuality. Marcuse
rejects the dominant philosophical paradigm, which sees reason as the
distinctly human faculty and the senses as disorderly, animalic, and inferior.
The concept of reason operative in this model, Marcuse suggests, is repressive
and totalitarian and does not adequately allow for aesthetic-erotic
gratification and development (*E&C* 119ff), due to its embrace of the
mind-body split. Marcuse's ideal is a form of human life in which reason
becomes sensuous, protecting and enriching the life instincts, and whereby the
unity of reason and the senses help create a “sensuous order” (*E&C* 223ff).
He assumes that as more restrictions are taken away from the instincts and as
they freely evolve, they will seek “*lasting* gratification” and will help
generate social relations that will make continual gratification possible. In
this way, “Eros redefines reason in its own terms. Reasonable is what sustains
the order of gratification” (*E&C* 224).This could make possible freer, more
fulfilling human relations and could create a social order and community based
on freedom, gratification, cooperation, and rational authority. Then,
“repressive reason gives way to a new *rationality of gratification* in which
reason and happiness converge” (*E&C* 224).

## The New Sensibility, Emancipation, and Revolution: The Late Marcuse

Hence, against the notion of the rational, domineering subject of modern
theory, Marcuse posits a subjectivity that is libidinal and embodied, evolving
and developing, while striving for happiness, gratification, and harmony. Such
subjectivity is always in process, is never fixed or static, and is thus a
creation and goal to be achieved, and is not posited as an absolute
metaphysical entity. Marcusean subjectivity is thus corporeal, gendered,
oppositional, and struggles against domination, repression, and oppression,
and for freedom and happiness. There is thus nothing essentialist, idealist,
or metaphysical, here. Instead, Marcuse's conception of subjectivity is both
materialist and socially-mediated, while active in cultivating the aesthetic
and erotic dimensions of experience as it strives for gratification and
harmonious relations with others, nature, and itself. Marcuse's radical
subjectivity is also political, refusing domination and oppression, struggling
against conditions which block freedom and happiness and for a freer and
better world.

There is widespread agreement today that we need the discourse of subjectivity
and agency for ethics, for politics, and for the positive reconstruction of
self and society. Within this context, I have argued that Marcuse's
perspectives on subjectivity stand up to at least aspects of the
poststructuralist and other critiques of the subject, as well as providing
resources for reconstructing the concept of subjectivity in the contemporary
era. It is important to note that for Marcuse the reconstruction of
subjectivity, the creation of eroticized rationality, and the development of a
free creative self, can only take place through practice and the
transformation of social relations and activity. Marcuse argued that the
existing society is organized precisely to prevent such a reconstruction of
subjectivity and new social relations, prescribing instead a regime of
domination, authority, repression, manipulative desublimation, and submission.
Especially in *One-Dimensional Man* (hereafter *ODM*), but throughout his
work, Marcuse presents a critique of hegemonic forms of subjectivity and
domination and a challenge to overcome the one-dimensional, conformist, and
normalized subjectivity of the advanced technological society.

Throughout his later writings, Marcuse was vitally concerned to discover and
theorize a “new sensibility,” with needs, values, and aspirations that would
be qualitatively different from subjectivity in one-dimensional society. To
create a new subjectivity, there must be “the emergence and education of a new
type of human being free from the aggressive and repressive needs and
aspirations and attitudes of class society, human beings created, in
solidarity and on their own initiative, their own environment, their own
*Lebenswelt*, their own ‘property.’”[^3] Such a revolution in needs and values
would help overcome a central dilemma in Marcuse's theory — sharply formulated
in *One-Dimensional Man* — that continued to haunt him: “How can the
administered individuals — who have made their mutilation into their own
liberties and satisfactions… liberate themselves from themselves as well as
from their masters? How is it even thinkable that the vicious circle be
broken?” (*ODM* 250–251).

In order to break through this vicious circle, individuals must transform
their present needs, sensibility, consciousness, values, and behavior while
developing a new radical subjectivity, so as to create the necessary
conditions for social transformation (*5L* 67). Radical subjectivity for
Marcuse practices the “great refusal” valorized in both *E&C* and *ODM*. In
*E&C* (149f), the “Great Refusal is the protest against unnecessary
repression, the struggle for the ultimate form of freedom — ‘to live without
anxiety.’” In *ODM* (256f), however, the Great Refusal is fundamentally
political, a refusal of repression and injustice, a saying no, an elemental
oppositional to a system of oppression, a noncompliance with the rules of a
rigged game, a form of radical resistance and struggle. In both cases, the
Great Refusal is based on a subjectivity that is not able to tolerate
injustice and that engages in resistance and opposition to all forms of
domination, instinctual and political.

In the late 1960s, Marcuse argued that emancipatory needs and a “new
sensibility” were developing within contemporary society. He believed that in
the New Left and counterculture there was the beginnings of “a political
practice of methodical disengagement and the refusal of the Establishment
aiming at a radical transvaluation of values” (*EL* 6) that was generating a
new type of human being and subject. The new sensibility “expresses the ascent
of the life instincts over aggressiveness and guilt” (*EL* 23) and contains a
“negation of the needs that sustain the present system of domination and the
negation of the values on which they are based” (*5L* 67). Underlying the
theory of the new sensibility is a concept of the active role of the senses in
the constitution of experience which rejects the Kantian and other
philosophical devaluation of the senses as passive, merely receptive. For
Marcuse, our senses are shaped and molded by society, yet constitute in turn
our primary experience of the world and provide both imagination and reason
with its material. He believes that the senses are currently socially
constrained and mutilated and argues that only an emancipation of the senses
and a new sensibility can produce liberating social change (*EL* 24ff and
*CR&R* 62ff)[^4].

Instead of the need for repressive performance and competition, the new
sensibility posits the need for meaningful work, gratification, and community;
instead of the need for aggression and destructive productivity, it affirms
love and the preservation of the environment; and against the demands of
industrialization, it asserts the need for beauty, sensuousness, and play,
affirming the aesthetic and erotic components of experience. The “new
sensibility” translates these values and needs into “a practice that involves
a break with the familiar, the routine ways of seeing, hearing, feeling,
understanding things so that the organism may become receptive to the
potential forms of a non-aggressive, non-exploitative world” (*EL* 6). This
total refusal of the dominant societal needs, values, and institutions
represents a radical break with the entirety of the society's institutions,
culture, and life-style, and supplies prefigurations of a new culture and
society.

The new sensibility would be developed, Marcuse claimed, by an aesthetic
education that would cultivate imagination, fantasy, the senses, and memory.
The new sensibility would combine the senses and reason, producing a “new
rationality” in which reason would be bodily, erotic, and political. Far from
being an irrationalist, Marcuse always argued that the senses and reason need
to be mediated, that reason should to be reconstructed, and that critical and
dialectical thinking are an important core of the new sensibility. Marcuse
maintained that aesthetic education constituted a cultivation of the senses
and that theory and education were essential components of transformative
social change.

In the writings of the late 1960s, Marcuse believed that the new sensibility
was embodied in the liberation movements of the day, the counterculture, and
New Left (see, especially, *EL*). Of course, he was disappointed that the new
sensibility did not become the agent of revolutionary change that he
envisaged; he was also dismayed that the New Left and counterculture fell prey
to the seductions of the consumer society, or were repressed and fragmented
(see *Counterrevolution and Revolt*, 1972, for a poignant account of Marcuse's
failing hopes and continued attempts to theorize emancipation and radical
social change). In the 1970s, however, he sought precisely the same values and
subjectivity in new social movements, in particular feminism, the
environmental movement, peace movement, and various forms of grass-roots
activism which came to be described as “new social movements.”

In the 1974 lecture on “Marxism and Feminism,” Marcuse notes for the first
time the constitutive role of gender, while theorizing the differences between
men and women in terms of his categories in *Eros and Civilization*. It is
notable that his conception of the feminine is associated with the traits he
ascribes to the new sensibility, while the masculine is associated with the
features of the Western ego and rationality of domination which Marcuse long
criticized, thus anticipating “difference feminism” which would also valorize
the feminine and maternal against the masculine.[^5] In this article, which
generated significant debate, Marcuse argues that “feminine” values and
qualities represent a determinate negation of the values of capitalism,
patriarchy, and the performance principle. In his view, “socialism, as a
qualitatively different society, must embody the antithesis, the definite
negation of aggressive and repressive needs and values of capitalism as a form
of male-dominated culture” (*M&F* 285). Furthermore:

> “Formulated as the antithesis of the dominating masculine qualities, such
> feminine qualities would be receptivity, sensitivity, non-violence,
> tenderness and so on. These characteristics appear indeed as opposite of
> domination and exploitation. On the primary psychological level, they would
> pertain to the domain of Eros, they would express the energy of the life
> instincts, against the death instinct and destructive energy” (*M&F*
> 285-286).

Marcuse was, however, criticized by women within the feminist movement and
others for essentializing gender difference, although he insisted the
distinction was a historical product of Western society and not an essential
gender difference. Women, he argued, possess a “feminine” nature qualitatively
different from men because they have been frequently freed from repression in
the work place, brutality in the military, and competition in the public
sphere. Hence, they developed characteristics which for Marcuse are the marks
of an emancipated humanity. He summarizes the difference between aggressive
masculine and capitalist values as against feminist values as the contrast
between “repressive productivity” and “creative receptivity,” suggesting that
“increased emancipation of feminine qualities in the established society” will
subvert the dominant masculine values and the capitalist performance
principle.

During the same decade, Marcuse also worked with Rudolf Bahro's conception of
“surplus consciousness.” He argued that just as Bahro claimed that in the
socialist countries a new consciousness was developing which could see the
discrepancy between “what is” and “what could be” and was not satisfied with
its' way of life, so too was such oppositional consciousness developing in the
advanced capitalist countries. “Surplus consciousness,” in the Bahro-Marcuse
conception, is a product of expanding education, scientific and technical
development, and refinement of the forces of production and labor process. On
this account, contemporary societies are producing a higher form of
consciousness and create needs that cannot be satisfied in the labor process
or everyday life, producing resentment and the potential for revolt. In
effect, Bahro and Marcuse are arguing that critical consciousness is produced
by the very social processes of the technological society and that this
subjectivity comes into conflict with existing hierarchy, waste, repression,
and domination, generating the need for social change. This position maintains
that existing social processes themselves are helping produce a subjectivity
that demands participation and fulfillment in the labor process and
socio-political life, as well as increased freedom, equality, and
opportunities for advancement and development. If these needs are not
satisfied, Bahro and Marcuse suggest, rebellion and social transformation will
be generated.

Curiously, precisely this process happened in the socialist world in which
rebellion against irrational and repressive bureaucratic social forms led to
an overthrow of what Bahro termed “actually existing socialism.” The critiques
of Marxism in the 1970s and 1980s in the increasingly hegemonic discourses of
poststructuralism and postmodern theory among the radical intelligentsia,
connected, I believe, with the collapse of “actually existing socialism,”
helped produce a rejection of Marxism, while defaming revolution as utopian
and, in many cases, deconstructing concepts of oppositional subjectivity and
politics. Such extreme versions of poststructuralism and postmodernism,
however, vitiate the project of emancipation and social reconstruction and
undermine efforts to develop oppositional politics and alternative conceptions
of society, culture, and subjectivity — alternatives found in the work of
Herbert Marcuse who I believe continues to provide important resources for
theory and politics in the contemporary era.

The postmodern/poststructuralist conception of subjectivity which stresses
decentering, fragmentation, and flexibility reproduces aspects of the crisis
of contemporary subjectivity overwhelmed by big corporations, new
technologies, seductive media culture, and the complex and contradictory
forces of globalization. Many postmodern critiques of traditional notions of
the subject or subjectivity thus end with fragmentation, crisis, decentering,
and dispersal, that they either cynically affirm without hope of
reconstruction, or valorize positively as conditions of the possibility of
more flexible subjects that can be in turn rejected, reconstructed, and
recreated at one's will and whim. Another possibility, however, is to call for
a reconstructive concept of subjectivity and agency in the face of theoretical
critique and practical fragmentation and dissipation. This is the position of
Marcuse and much of critical theory which begins by recognizing theoretical
flaws in the modern concept of the (rational, unitary, ideal) subject, as well
as the crisis of subjectivity in contemporary society.

Critical theory is dialectical, resisting both claims to the primacy of
structure or agency, thus overcoming both determinism and idealism. Marcuse
problematizes subjectivity and agency, recognizes the force of domination, and
yet militates for liberation and transformation. Opposing mechanistic theories
of history without agency and subjectivity, as well as idealist notions that
see history as the development of humanity or subjectivity (i.e. the subject,
spirituality, God, etc.), critical theory seeks to overcome unproductive
dichotomies and to produce more sophisticated and transformative perspectives.

This problematization of subject and history discloses an intersection between
critical theory and postmodern theory and significant differences between some
of the versions. Both unveil the abstractness and mythological constitution of
the subject; both reject a universal subject and the equation of the subject
with metaphysical rationality. On the whole, critical theory is more
reconstructive with theorists like Adorno, Marcuse, Fromm, and Habermas
offering quite different perspectives on the reconstruction of subjectivity
and agency, while many postmodern theorists either revel in difference and
heterogeneity (Lyotard), cynically reject any possibility of reconstruction
and transformation (Baudrillard), or assume neutral and/or micrological
perspectives that eschew ambitious theoretical or political reconstruction
(followers of Foucault, Rorty in some moods, and postmodern camp followers who
don't yet see its transformative potential); other postmodern theorists,
however, urge reconstruction of subjectivity and agency … la feminism and
critical theory, and thus present supplementary positive reconstructive
positions to critical theory.

Hence, some versions of postmodern theory reproduce liberal reformism and
pluralism in their emphasis on difference, reform, and rejection of broader
perspectives of social transformation. There is also a tendency that
fragmentary, aleatory, and nomadic postmodern subjectivity replicates the
self-centered, competitive, yet interactive subjectivity of contemporary
capitalism. Yet in view of the complex and contradictory development of
contemporary capitalist culture and subjectivity, the sort of critical and
oppositional perspectives offered by Marcuse are needed more than ever. As in
Marcuse's day, the ambivalent unity of the positive and negative, of
production and destruction, continues to operate in the global restructuring
of capitalism with its technological revolution and seductions, growing
discrepancies between the haves and the have nots, and increasingly power of
forces of domination and destruction. Now, more much than ever, critical
consciousness and oppositional subjectivity is needed to counter the forces of
domination which appear more in the guise of the seductions of AOL and Time
Warner, the machinations of Microsoft, and the global maneuvering of
near-invisible forces like the WTO, IMF, and World Bank than in the boots and
repression of Big Brother.

## Some Concluding Comments

In retrospect, the critique of the subject launched by the Frankfurt School,
feminism, poststructuralism, postmodern theory, and others have enriched our
thinking on subjectivity by challenging us to rethink the problematics of the
subject and agency, and have helped us think through and conceptualize various
dimensions of experience and action neglected in traditional accounts, as well
as to envisage alternative possibilities for thought, action, and everyday
life. While traditional and modern conceptions of the subject were excessively
rationalist, essentialist, idealist, and metaphysical, I have argued that the
contemporary critiques of the subject provide the impetus and occasion to
develop more critical and creative conceptions of post-metaphysical
subjectivity.

But often discussions of the “crisis of the subject” conflate contemporary
critique and rejection of the concept of a metaphysical unitary subject with
the fragmentation, decline, or dispersal of subjectivity and agency under the
sway of powerful social forces like the compulsion to work and consume,
seduction of the media, or disciplinary agencies. I would argue that while
critiques of problematic theoretical concepts of the subject are generally
salutary, critical theory needs to respond reconstructively to evocations of
decline of agency, the will to resist and struggle, and the eclipse of
politics in the present era. Marcuse always attempted to ground his conception
of radical subjectivity in existing struggles, movements, and tendencies. He
was aware that oppositional subjectivity, and the movements and revolts in
which it was grounded, were fragile, subject to dispersion and defeat, or
absorption and cooptation. Moreover, Marcuse was aware of the contradictions
of oppositional subjectivities and movements that on one hand reproduced
tendencies of the existing capitalist societies, while opposing other aspects
and seeking alternatives.

Hence, subjectivity for Marcuse, whether the dominated subject of advanced
capitalism or oppositional subjectivity which he sought in first the New Left
and counterculture and then new social movements, was historical, and was
always full of contradictions and ambiguities. Marcuse was more aware than
most in the Marxian tradition of the need for a robust theory of subjectivity
to generate the subjective conditions for change and he was deeply interested
in theory, culture, and social experience which would help create a new
subjectivity. Hence, his attempts to reconstruct subjectivity are grounded in
his political desire for radical social change and preservation of the
individual.

In his sometimes tortured attempts to generate new perspectives on
subjectivity, and an alternative society and politics, during his last decade
of work in the 1970s, Marcuse privileged cultural revolution and the
cultivation of a new sensibility as crucial catalysts for social change, as he
(unsuccessfully) sought new social movements to embody his oppositional
subjectivity and politics. While this work provides important theoretical
impulses to rethink radical politics, subjectivity, and culture in the
contemporary era, we must move beyond Marcuse in a new historical situation,
drawing on the best resources of the most advanced critical theories of our
time.

Hence, in conclusion, I would like to make some comments contrasting
Habermasian perspectives on subjectivity with Marcusean ones to indicate the
specific contributions and strengths, and limitations, of Marcuse's position.
I have suggested that Marcuse offers a notion of a corporeal subjectivity with
an emphasis on its aesthetic and erotic dimensions, while Habermas's
communicative reason lacks a body, grounding in nature and materiality, and
the aesthetic and erotic components. That is, while Habermas's conception of
subjectivity contains a grounding in sociality and ego-alter relations, he
does not offer a notion of aesthetic, erotic, and embodied and sensual
subjectivity as in Marcuse's conception. There is also not as strong a
critique of the tendencies toward conformity and normalization as in Marcuse's
conception, nor is there as forceful a notion of transformation and
emancipation. Nor does Habermas offer a notion of revolutionary subjectivity.

There are, on the other hand, problems with Marcuse's conceptions of
subjectivity. I have downplayed the extent of Marcuse's dependence on
questionable aspects of Freud's instinct theory because I believe that a
Marcusean conception of subjectivity can be produced without dependence on
Freud's conception of the political economy of the instincts, the death
instinct, and the somewhat biologistic notion of Eros that Marcuse draws from
Freud. Yet while Marcuse's focus on the corporeal, aesthetic, erotic, and
political dimensions of subjectivity constitutes a positive legacy, there are
omissions and deficiencies in his account. Crucially, he underemphasizes the
ethical and arguably, concerning the political, does not adequately develop
notions of justice and democracy. Since notions of ethical, just, and
democratic subjectivity are not cultivated in Marcuse's writings, Habermas's
analyses provide a necessary complement. Habermas's primary focus on the
ego-alter relation and his subsequent treatises on morals and moral
development, democracy and law, and the social obligations and constraints on
subjectivity offer an important correction to Marcuse's analyses. Hence, both
perspectives on subjectivity by themselves are one-sided and require
supplementation by the other.

While I have been primarily concerned in this paper to interrogate Marcuse's
resources for the rethinking and reconstruction of subjectivity, I would argue
that no one thinker has the answer to the question and that we would thus be
well advised to draw upon a wealth of thinkers to rehabilitate and reconstruct
subjectivity in the contemporary moment. Within the Frankfurt School, Adorno,
Benjamin, Fromm, Habermas, Marcuse, and others make important contributions
and outside of the tradition many feminist theorists, poststructuralists, and
others also advance the project.[^6] Marcuse and other critical theorists
provide many important contributions to our understanding of subjectivity and
agency, while challenging us to further rethink the problematics of
subjectivity in relation to the socio-economic developments and political
struggles of our own turbulent period. In this way, the contemporary critiques
of the subject challenge us to come up with better conceptions and to develop
new resources for critical theory and practice.

## References

-   *R&R* = Marcuse, Herbert: *Reason and Revolution* (New York: Oxford
    University Press, 1941; reprinted Boston: Beacon Press, 1960).
-   *E&C* = Marcuse, Herbert: *Eros and Civilization* (Boston: Beacon Press,
    1955; new edition, Routledge, 1997).
-   *ODM* = Marcuse, Herbert: *One Dimensional Man* (Boston: Beacon Press,
    1964; second edition, 1991).
-   *EL* = Marcuse, Herbert: *An Essay on Liberation* (Boston: Beacon Press,
    1969).
-   *CR&R* = Marcuse, Herbert: *Counterrevolution and Revolt* (Boston: Beacon
    Press, 1972).
-   *M&F* = Marcuse, Herbert, “Marxism and Feminism,” *Women's Studies 2*, 3
    (Old Westbury, 1974): 279-288.

[^1]: See in particular in particular, Jurgen Habermas, (1984 and 1987)
    *Theory of Communicative Action*, vols. 1 and 2. Boston: Beacon Press.

[^2]: I am aware that the late Foucault was also engaged in a search for a
    stronger conception of agency in his later writings and want to argue here
    that Marcuse offers a more robust account of resistance and agency than
    Foucault. On Foucault's later quests to develop a theory of subjectivity
    and resistance and its limitations, see Steven Best and Douglas Kellner,
    *Postmodern Theory: Critical Interrogations*. London and New York:
    MacMillan and Guilford Press, 1991 and Couze Venn, “Beyond Enlightenment?
    After the Subject of Foucault, Who Comes?,” *Theory, Culture & Society*,
    Vol. 14, Nr. 3 (August 1997): 1-28.

[^3]: Herbert Marcuse, “The Realm of Freedom and the Realm of Necessity: A
    Reconsideration,” *Praxis* 5, 1 (Zagreb: 1969): 24.

[^4]: In *CR&R* 63ff., Marcuse connects his notion of the new sensibility with
    the analysis of the early Marx on the liberation of the senses; his
    conception is also influenced by Schiller's conception of aesthetic
    education.

[^5]: For an argument parallel to mine developed through an engagement with
    French feminism and poststructuralism, see Kelly Oliver, *Subjectivity
    without Subjects* (New Jersey: Rowman and Littlefield, 1998). Oliver
    provides an extended argument that we can talk about subjectivity (and
    agency) without presupposing or needing a subject, claiming that
    subjectivity does not necessarily imply a “subject” and that we are better
    off without such a concept. She develops notions of subjectivity as
    relational and intersubjective at its “center” and contrasts varying
    discourses and forms of masculine and feminine subjectivity. This project
    is parallel, I suggest, to Marcuse and the Frankfurt School, disclosing a
    surprising affinity between Critical Theory, French feminism, and
    poststructuralism.

[^6]: This paper was first presented in a panel at SPEP (Denver, 1998) in
    which my colleagues David Sherman and Pierre Lamarche presented the
    contributions of Adorno and Benjamin in rethinking subjectivity. See, in
    addition, Oliver's account of the contributions to refiguring subjectivity
    in poststructuralism and feminism, Ope cit..s
