% Essays
% Feral Faun

## The anarchist subculture: a critique[^1]

> “…the absence of imagination needs models; it swears by them and lives only
> through them.”

It is easy to claim that there is no anarchist movement in North America.

This claim frees one from having to examine the nature of that movement and
what one’s role is in it. But a network of publications, bookstores, anarchist
households, squats and correspondence connecting those with anti-statist
perspectives most certainly does exist. It has crystallized into a subculture
with its mores, rituals and symbols of “rebellion”. But can a subculture
create free individuals capable of making the lives they desire? The anarchist
subculture certainly hasn’t. I hope to explore why in this article.

The Anarchist subculture certainly does encompass apparently rebellious
activity, historical exploration, social analysis (theory), creative play and
explorations into self-liberation. But these do not exist as an integrated
praxis aimed at understanding society and opening possibilities for us to
create our lives for ourselves, but rather as social roles, occasionally
overlapping, but mostly separate which function mainly to maintain themselves
and the subculture which creates them and which they, in turn create.

Political correct militants dominate radical action in this subculture.

They deny the need for social analysis. After all, the issues have already
been laid out by left liberals — feminism, gay lib, anti-racism, animal lib,
ecology, socialism, opposition to war — add a dash of anti-statism and, by
god, it’s anarchism! Well, ain’t it? To guarantee that no one can doubt their
anarchist credentials, anarchist militants will be sure to shout the loudest
at demonstrations, burn a few flags and be prepared to battle cops, fascists
and RCPers wherever possible. What they won’t do is analyze their activities
or their role as militants to see if they are really an any way undermining
society or if they are merely playing its loyal opposition, reinforcing it by
reinforcing role within their role within its spectacle. Their refusal of
analysis has allowed many of them to delude themselves into believing that
they are part of a mass movement of rebellion which must be converted to
anarchism. But no such mass movement exists on this continent, and the
activities of the militants are mainly a letting off of steam in rituals of
opposition that only reinforce their place in the anarchist subculture.

Anarchist historians are mostly professors, publishers and bookstore
operators, interested in keeping information about anarchist history
available. Most of these people are well-meaning, but they fail to apply
critical analysis to their histories. The vast majority of anarchist
historical material seems to serve a myth-making purpose, creating heroes,
martyrs and models to imitate. But all of these models have failed in creating
more than temporary anarchic situations. This should, at the very least, lead
to a questioning of how and why they failed that goes beyond the simplistic
claim that they were crushed by the authorities. The lack of such analysis has
rendered anarchist history largely useless to present struggles against
authority, turning it instead into the same thing for the anarchist subculture
that mainstream history is for society at large, a myth that upholds the
present order of things.

Certain anti-authoritarians theorists have intellectually attacked the most
basic underpinnings of society in ways that reveal their role in our
domestication. The theorists’ examination of these things has even led some of
them to drop the label “anarchist,” though their rejection of authority and
connection to the subculture through their writings and their friendships
continue their role within it. And for all the depth of their intellectual
exploration, a certain level of work refusal, shoplifting and minor vandalism
seems to be the sum of their practice. Because they do not explore practical
ways of expressing rebellion against the totality of domination revealed by
their critiques, these critiques lose their edge as radical theory and seem
more like philosophy. No longer being a tool of active rebellion, their
thought instead becomes a means of defining the intellectual edge of anarchic
thought, a means by which to determine whether an idea is radical enough. In
this way, the role of the intellectual is perpetuated in the anarchist
subculture.

Creative play has also been specialized within the subculture. Forgetting the
critique which calls for the supersession of art through spontaneous,
creative, free play by everyone, mail artists, performance artists and
“anti-artists” claim this category as their own, destroying spontaneity and
freedom, and valorizing the activity as art. Many of the activities of these
people — festivals, wild poetry readings, improvisational noise jam sessions
and interactive theater — can be a lot of fun and are worth participating in
on that level, but, placed within the framework as art, their subversive bite
is dulled. In valorizing creativity, these artists have made it more important
to “be creative” than to have fun, and have reduced their critique to the
level of whether something can be utilized in creating art. The creative
process is recuperated into a form of productive labor making works of art.
Play is transformed into performance. Acts of detournement become spectacles
in mail-art shows. Subversion is recuperated by society as art. Ignoring the
fact that art is a social and cultural category, anarchic artists claim that
art opposes culture, but their activities create for them the role of cultural
workers within the anarchist subculture. When the situationists said that
revolutionary praxis needed to become therapeutic, they had no idea that
certain North American anarchists would find ways to wed this and a few other
half-digested situationist ideas to new age psychotherapies — but, gee, those
Yanks (and Canadians) sure are inventive, ain’t they? New age therapies came
into the anarchist subculture largely through feminist, gay lib and related
movements. The reason given for practicing these therapies is self-discovery
and self-liberation. But all psychotherapies — including those of humanist and
“third force” psychologists — were developed to integrate people into society.
When feminists, gay liberationists and similar groups began using therapeutic
techniques, it helped integrate individuals into a common framework from which
they would view the world and act on it. Anarcho-therapists have adapted such
practices as meditation, play therapy, support and separate spaces. Meditation
is really just a form of escape, without the physical damage of drinking or
drugs. It eases the stresses of daily life, keeping them from being too much
to bear.

It can, thus, be useful, but is not self-liberating. Play as therapy, like
play as art, loses its subversive edge. Its parameters defined, it becomes a
safe release, a letting off of steam, rather than a true breaking out with all
the risks that involves. It does not not present a challenge to authority or
the work ethic, because it is play safely ensconced in the framework of
productive usefulness and brings out the chaotic energy that could otherwise
challenge authority within a safely ordered framework.

Support group therapy is a particularly insidious form of self-deception. A
group of people get together to talk about a common problem, burden or
oppression they supposedly share. This practice immediately removes the
problem from the realm of daily life, of individual relationships and
particular circumstances, into the realm of “our common oppression” where it
can be fit into an ideological framework. Support groups are formed with a
particular purpose (otherwise, why form them?) which will shape the workings
of the group, bias the conclusions drawn and mold the participants into the
framework of the group ideology. The creation of separate spaces women’s only,
gay only, etc.) reinforces the worst tendencies of support group therapy, by
guaranteeing that no outside element can penetrate. Anarchists blithely ignore
the authoritarian and propertarian implications of this practice and its
inherent bigotry, excusing them because it is the practice of an oppressed
group. All of these therapeutic forms separate people from their daily life
experience and place them in a separate “therapeutic” realm where they can be
readily integrated into a particular social and ideological framework. In the
case of anarcho-therapists, it is the framework of the anarchist subculture
and the role they play in it.

Most of the people I’ve met in the anarchist subculture are sincere people.
They truly want to rebel against authority and destroy it. But they are
products of society, trained to distrust themselves and their desires and to
fear the unknown. Finding a subculture in place with roles to which they can
adapt themselves, it is much easier to fall into the role or roles with which
they feel most comfortable, secure in the knowledge that they are part of the
rebel milieu, than to truly take the leap in the dark of living for themselves
against society. And these “anarchist” roles plug into a social structure and
a way of relating to the world at large that are equally essential to the
anarchist subculture and which also need to be examined.

> “Would it not be an anachronism to cultivate the taste for harbors,
> certitudes, systems?”

The structure of the anarchist subculture is largely centered around
publishing projects, bookstores, collective living situations and radical
activism. These projects and the methods of running them that reproduce the
subculture create the methods of anarchist “outreach”. What they create in
many ways resembles an evangelical religious sect.

Most of the projects that make up the structure of the anarchist subculture
are run collectively using a process of consensus decision making. A few are
the projects of single individuals occasionally helped out by friends. (On the
fringe of the subculture are numerous flyer projects almost all of which are
individual projects.) I am putting off a thorough critique of consensus for a
later article. For now, let it suffice to point out that the process of
consensus does require the subjugation of the individual will to the will of
the group as a whole and the subjugation of the immediate to the mediation of
meetings and decision-making processes. It has an inherently conservative
bent, becasue it creates policies that can only be changed if everyone agrees
to it. It is an invisible authority to which individuals are subject, which
limits the extent to which they question the project in which they are
involved or the anarchist subculture.

A large number of anarchists live on their own or with lovers. But many see a
collective living arrangement as better, sometimes for as simple a reason as
easing everyone’s financial burdens (the reason which involves the fewest
illusions), but more often to create a living support group situation, to
participate more easily in a common project or to “put theory into practice”.
having already dealt with support groups, I will only add that living together
in a support group will tend to exaggerate all of the insulatory and
idealogical aspects of support group therapy. A collective living situation
can certainly ease some of the aspects of sharing a common project, from the
financial to the trick of getting people together to discuss the project. It
can also increase the chances of the project becoming insulatory, feeding on
itself, losing necessary critical input.

But it is those who claim to be “putting theory into practice” in these living
situations who are practicing the highest level of self-deception.

Group living situations could possibly be a basis for exploring new ways of
relating, but the semi-permanence of such situations tends toward the creation
of social roles and structures, and new explorations are not what the
households I know of are pursuing. The seperation between theory and practice
implied by the phrase “putting theory into practice” is evident in the
relative sameness of these living situations. Most anarchists believe that
there are certain principles that should govern the way people inter-relate.
In their living collectives, land trusts and squats, they attempt to live by
their principles. Their living situations are not theoretico-practical
explorations, but rather, the submission of individuals to a pre-conceived
social structure. These principles are not put to the test in these
situations, because the anarchist household is an insulatory situation, a kind
of alternative reality in the midst of the world. With the exception of
anarchist squats — which do, at least, present a challenge to the authority of
landlords and property — these households relate to the world of external
authorities in the same way everyone else does: paying their rent (or property
tax) and bills, and working or collecting welfare. These households do little,
if anything, toward undermining society, but they offer a structure for people
to live in that maintains their feeling of rebelliousness and the subculture
gives them a safe place to express this feeling.

The various publishing projects (including periodicals) and bookstores are the
main sources of history, theory and information for the anarchist subculture.
To some extent, these projects have to plug into the capitalist system and so
rarely pretend to be inherently revolutionary. When they are group projects,
they are usually run by consensus on the absurd assumption that there is
something anarchistic about having to sit through long, boring meetings to
work out the details of running a small business or producing a magazine or
book. But the aspect of these projects that really bothers me is that they
tend to become means of defining the framework of thought in the anarchist
subculture rather than a provocation to discuss and explore the nature of
alienation and domination and how to go about destroying them. To a large
extent this lack of provocation is inherent in what is published. Most
anarchist publications, whether books or periodicals, are uncritical reprints
of old anarchist writings, uncritical histories, rehashing of leftist opinions
with a bit of anti-statism thrown in or uncritical modernizations of out-dated
anarchist ideas. Such writings reinforce certain standards and models of what
it means to be an anarchist without questioning those models. Even those
writings which do present a challenge rarely seem to evoke the sort of
intelligent, critical discussion that could be part of a stimulating radical
praxis. Rather, they are also often taken as a source of standards, models,
ways of defining the parameters of revolt. This stems, in part, from the
nature of the printed word, which seems to have a permanence that is not
compatible with the fluid, living nature of thought or discussion. Most
readers have trouble seeing through the printed word to the fluidity of
thought behind it. So they react as though dealing with something sacred —
either worshipping it or desecrating it. Neither reaction pleases me, because
both signify that the ideas have become reified, have become commodities in
the marketplace of ideas — an image reinforced by the fact that these ideas
are mostly found for sale in bookstores. Another aspect of anarchist
publication is propaganda. This is the advertising side of anarchism — the
proof that it is largely just a commodity in the marketplace of ideas. Most
anarchist propaganda is an attempt to create an image of anarchism that is
attractive to whomever the propaganda is aimed at. Thus, much of this
literature seems to be aimed at easing people’s minds, at proving that anarchy
isn’t so extreme, that it doesn’t challenge people; it reassures them, showing
them that they can continue to have secure, structured lives even after the
anarchist revolution. Since most anarchist literature, including this sort, is
bought or stolen by anarchists, I wonder if it isn’t really an attempt at
self-reassurrance, and reinforcement of the defining models of the subculture.
The structures which make anti-authoritarian literature available could
provide a network for challenging discussion aimed at creating and maintaining
a truly rebellious praxis, but instead it creates a framework of models and
structures for people to follow the “anarchist principles” to which so many
blindly cling, which reinforce the anarchist subculture.

Radical activism is another aspect of the public image of the anarchist
subculture, particularly the militant wing. It largely involves participation
in leftist demonstration, though occasionally anarchists will organize their
own demonstration on a particular issue. One motive behind much of this
activism is to win people over to anarchism. To accomplish this, anarchists
must separate themselves as a definable entity and make themselves attractive
to those they are trying to convert. At present, most activism seems to be
trying to attract youth and, particularly, punk youth.

So anarchists tend to be particularly loud and rowdy at demonstrations,
portraying an image of defiance and showing that anarchists mean “serious
business.” Since other groups, like the R.C.P., also get rowdy and defiant,
anarchist militants have to make the distinction clear by loudly denouncing
these groups and even getting into fights with them — ya kinda have to wonder
about these anarchist militants, if their actions are so similar to Maoist
hacks that they have to consciously put out an effort to distinguish
themselves. But evengelicalism isn’t the only reason anarchists participate in
these rituals of opposition. Many participate because it is the approprate
anarchist thing to do. In their minds, “anarchist” is a role that involves a
specific social activity. It is a subspecies of leftist that is rowdier and a
bit more violent than most. This allows them to separate anarchy and rebellion
from their daily lives. Questions like, “Does this activity help destroy
domination, undermine the spectacle and create free life?” are irrelevent
since anarchism is defined by participation in militant activities, not by
rebellion against everything that stands in the way of our freedom to create
for ourselves the lives we desire. As long as one is active in demonstrations
in the right way, one is an anarchist, upholding the image and maintaining the
anarchist subculture.

Though some of these structures — especially those dealing with publication —
have potential for being part of a truly anarchic challenge to society, the
anarchist subculture diverts their energy to maintain and reproduce itself.
The subculture offers us “harbors, certitudes, systems,” tending to make us
cautious, leading us to embrace the known rather than face the challenge of
the unknown. So anarchists and anti-authoritarians, thinking themselves
rebels, are in fact the ones who define the limits of revolt and so recuperate
it. The anarchist subculture has undermined anarchy, turned it into another
commodity on the idealogical marketplace and so made it into another category
of society.

> “The point is precisely to step aside, to diverge, abolutely, from the rule;
> to leap from the arena with hysterical verve; to elude forever the traps set
> along the way… Long live the Impossible!”

To leave a critique of the anarchist subculture at examination of some of its
more important roles and structures is to miss its most important fault — that
it is a subculture. Subcultures constitute a particular sort of social
phenomenon with particular traits. If those traits were conductive to
rebellion, if they moved people to act for themselves, then it might be
possible to reform the anarchist subculture, but those traits in fact tend in
the opposite direction. There have been so many rebel subcultures, so many
bohemias, all of them recuperated. This clearly indicates that there is
something inherent in subcultures that keeps them from presenting a real
challenge to the society of which they are a part. Let me try to examine why.

In order for a subculture to exist, its parameters must be defined in a way
that distinguishes it from other groups in society. Because a subculture is
not an official or legal entity, these parameters need not be in any offical
or readily definable form. Most often, they are underlying, inherent in the
nature of the subculture, consisting of shared values, shared ideals, shared
customs and shared systems of relating. This means that participation in a
subculture requires a certain level of conformity.

This does not rule out disagreeements about the interpretation of those
parameters — such disagreements can be very intense, since those involved will
see themselves as upholders of the real values of the group. But the real
threat to any subculture is any individual who refuses parameters.

Such a one is dangerous, amoral, a threat to all. What the parameters of a
subculture really amount to is its system of morality. It provides a way to
see itself as superior to society in general. It thus creates a method for
relating to others through guilt and self-righteousness, two of authority’s
favorite weapons. The existence and maintainence of a subculture thus requires
an internalized authority to maintain itself.

The creation of parameters will lead to an intolerance towords those perceived
as irretrievably outside the parameters — especially if they are competitors
on some level (e.g., the RCP, SWP and the like, to anarchists), but it also
leads towards a toleration of everyone perceived as part of one’s subculture.
Due to the different interpretations of the parameters of the subculture,
arguments and fights, sometimes even vicious ones, are possible, but there is
still a certain unity that is recognized and tends to keep disagreements
within a certain framework. Such tolerance is necessary to maintain the
subculture. It also has the effect of reducing everything to a level of
mundane mediocrity. Extremes are permitted only to the extent that they can be
kept from presenting any real challenge to the subculture. Tact, caution and
politeness are the order of the day in order to maintain the “unity within
diversity” of the subculture. Conflictst tend to be ritualized and
predictable. In the anarchist subculture in particular, there are rarely any
face-to-face, honest and passionate conflicts. Instead, face-to-face
interactions are of the politeness and subcultural ritual, of tolerance, and
so are, as often as not, boring. Learning to relate through ritual, through
tact, through social masks, has left us ignorant of how to relate freely. But
within these rituals of toleration a subculture cannot maintain itself,
because like society at large, a subculture requires conformity, social
harmony and the suppression of individual passions for its continued
existence.

In relating to people outside, subcultures tend to opt for either a sort of
separatism — minimalizing contact with the outside world — or evangelism —
seeking to win people over to the perspective of the subculture. Since the
anarchist subculture is decidely evangelistic, it is this that I will deal
with. All evangelistic groups, from the Baptists to the R.C.P., from the
Moonies to the anarchist subculture, are so because they are convinced that
they have the answers to the essential problems of the world.

Convincing others of this becomes a major motive behind the actions of those
within such subcultures. They act and speak so as to present an image of
self-assurance as well as a kind of solidarity with those whom they wish to
win over. Individuals within such subcultures do not live for themselves but
for the ideal, the answer that they are so certain will cure all. They live,
or try to live, up to a certain image, and so are conformists.

Because of the nature of subcultures, the anarchist subculture can only exist
by removong anarchy and rebellion from the terrain of our present day lives
and turning them into ideals with corresponding social roles. It will praise
“spontaneity” while defining its content and, thereby, supressing it. Free
expression of passion and desires are not encouraged, in fact, quite often the
opposite. Within its own framework, the anarchist subculture is quite
conservative, its own maintenance being its top priority. Every new
exploration and experimentation is a threat to its existence and must be
quickly defined, limited and recuperated by it. This explains both the absurd,
defensive reactions of certain anarchists to more daring theoretical
explorations, as well as the tendency for these explorations to remain in a
realm of seperated theory without practice. A subculture is a place of
security, for safety, for finding social roles and systems of relationships by
which one can define one’s self, not a place for free explorations and
encountering the unknown.

The anarchist subculture, then, cannot be an expression of lived anarchy and
rebellion, but can only be society’s way of defining, limiting and
recuperating them. As children of society, we are all well-versed in
distrusting ourselves, in fearing the unknown, in prefering security to
freedom. It is no surprise that we that we so easily fall into activities that
create and maintain a subculture. But its long past time that we admit that
this is just our way of fitting in to the society we claim to hate, of
creating a niche for ourselves in its structure. For this subculture is not a
real challenge to society; it is merely a loyal opposition whose rules — like
all rules — are just a subset of the rules of society.

So the time has come to throw caution to the wind, to diverge absolutely, as
the surrealists say, from all rules, to leap from the arena of the anarchist
subculture — or to tear the arena down. Always there will be those demanding
to know what we’ll put in its place, but the point is precisely to put nothing
in its place. The problem, the weakness of those of us who’ve claimed to
oppose authority, has been our need to have an authority inside our heads, an
answer, a way to keep ourselves in line. We have not trusted ourselves, and so
at those moments when anarchy has actually broken forth, when authority has
temporarily broken down opening all possibilities, we have not dared to
explore the unknown, to live our desires and passions. Instead we have
channelled our rebellion into the mere image of rebellion, but which keep us
safe from ever having to confront our real passions and desires.

The refusal of authority, the refusal of all constraints, must include the
refusal of the anarchist subculture, for it is a form of authority. With this
support gone, we are left with nothing — but ourselves. As transient,
ever-changing, passionate individuals, we each become the only basis for
creating our lives and opposing society as it strives to force our lives into
its mold. Rebellion ceases to be a role and instead becomes our
moment-by-moment refusal to let our lives be stolen from us. Anarchy ceases to
be an ideal and becomes the havoc we wreck on authority, which undermines it
and opens possibilities, new realms of exploration for us. To realize this, we
have to cease to think as victims and begin to think as creators. The negative
paranoia that permeates the way we relate to the world needs to be rejected so
that we can accurately assess the strengths and weaknesses of society as we
confront it in our daily lives and can intelligently undermine it. A positive
paranoia — a recognition that society and the hell it puts us through are
aberations and that the world is full of wonder and beauty, that within it all
of our deepest desires and more can be easily realized — needs to be
cultivated. Then we will dare to face the unknown, to relate to each other
freely and passionately, avoiding

mere toleration and accepting honest conflict. We will dare to oppose society
from the strength of our own desires, dreams and lust for life. We’ll refuse
easy answers, systems and security for the prisons they are, preffering the
freedom found in ecstatically exploring the unknown, the adventure of
discovering the world of wonder that authority tries to deny us. What has been
denied us, we must take, and we must take it not by conforming to a
subculture, but by plunging head first into the unknown, by taking the risk of
leaving behind all that has suppressed us no matter how comfortable and
rebelling totally against society.

> “Everything is always and automatically to be risked absolutely. One knows,
> at least, that the thread one finds in the labyrinth must lead elsewhere.”

## Steal back your life[^2]

Economy — the domination of survival over life — is essential for the
maintenance of all other forms of domination. Without the threat of scarcity,
it would be difficult to coerce people into obedience to the daily routine of
work and pay. We were born into an economized world. The social institution of
property has made scarcity a daily threat. Property, whether private or
communal, seperates the individual from the world, creating a situation in
which, rather than simply taking what one wants or needs, one is supposed to
ask permission, a permission generally only granted in the form of economic
exchange. In this way, different levels of poverty are guaranteed to everyone,
even the rich, because under the rule of social property what one is not
permitted to have far exceeds what one is permitted to have. The domination of
survival over life is maintained.

Those of us who desire to create our lives as our own recognize that this
domination, so essential to the maintainence of society, is an enemy we must
attack and destroy. With this understanding, theft and squatting can take on
significance as part of an insurgent life project. Welfare scamming, eating at
charity feeds, dumpster diving and begging may allow one to survive without a
regular job, but they do not in any way attack the economy; they are within
the economy. Theft and squatting are also often merely survival tactics.
Squatters who demand the “right to a home” or try to legalize their squats,
thieves who work their “jobs” like any other worker, only in order to
accumulate more worthless commodities — these people have no interest in
destroying the economy… they merely want a fair share of its goods. But those
who squat and steal as part of an insurgeent life, do so in defiance of the
logic of economic property. Refusing to accept the scarcity imposed by this
logic or to bow to the demands of a world they did not create, such insurgents
take what they desire without asking anyone’s permission whenever the
possibility arises. In this defiance of society’s economic rule, one takes
back the abundance of the world as one’s own — and this is an act of
insurrection. In order to maintain social control, the lives of individuals
have to be stolen away.

In their place, we received economic survival, the tedious existence of work
and pay. We cannot buy our lives back, nor can we beg them back. Our lives
will only be our own when we steal them back — and that means taking what we
want without asking permission.

## Against Charity

In many cities in the United States, anarchists have organized “Food Not
Bombs” feeds. The organizers of these projects will explain that food should
be free, that no one should ever have to go hungry. Certainly a fine
sentiment… and one to which the anarchists respond in much the same way as
christians, hippies or left liberals — by starting a charity.

We will be told, however, that “Food Not Bombs” is different. The
decision-making process used by the organizers is nonheirarchical. They
recieve no government or corporate grants. In many cities, they serve their
meals as an act of civil disobedience, risking arrest. Obviously, “Food Not
Bombs” is not a large-scale charitable bureaucracy; in fact, it is often a
very slip-shod effort… but it is a charity — and that is never questioned by
its anarchist organizers.

Charities are a necessary part of any economic social system. The scarcity
imposed by the economy creates a situation in which some people are unable to
meet their most basic needs through the normal channels. Even in nations with
highly developed social welfare programs, there are those who fall through the
cracks in the system. Charities take up the slack where the state’s welfare
programs can’t or won’t help. Groups like “Food Not Bombs” are, thus a
voluntary workforce helping to preserve the social order by reinforcing the
dependence of the poor upon programs not of their own creation.

No matter how non-heirarchal the decision-making process used by the
relationship is always authoritarian. The beneficiaries of a charity are at
the mercy of the organizers of the program and so are not free to act on their
own terms in this relationship. This can be seen in the humiliating way in
which one must recieve charity. Charity feeds like “Food Not Bombs” require
the beneficiaries to arrive at a time not of their choosing in order to stand
in line to recieve food not of their choosing (and usually poorly made) in
quantities doled out by some volunteer who wants to make sure that everyone
gets a fair share. Of course, it’s better than going hungry, but the
humiliaton is at least as great as that of waiting in line at the grocery
store to pay for food one actually wants and can eat when one wants it. The
numbness we develop to such humiliation — the numbness which is made evident
by the case with which certain anarchists will opt to eat at charity feeds
every day in order to avoid paying for food, as though there were no other
options — shows the extent to which our society is permeated with such
humiliating interactions. Still, one would think that anarchists would refuse
such interactions as far as it lies within their power to do so and would seek
to create interactions of a different sort in order to destroy the humiliation
imposed by society. Instead, many create programs that reinforce this
humiliation.

But what of the empathy one may feel for another who is suffering from a
poverty one knows all too well; what of the desire to share food with others?
Programs like “Food Not Bombs” do not express empathy, they express pity.
Doling out food is not sharing; it is an impersonal, hierarchical relationship
between social role “donor” and social role “beneficiary”.

Lack of imagination has led anarchists to deal with the question of hunger
(which is an abstract question for most of them) in much the same way as
christians and liberals, creating institutions which parallel those which
already exist. As is to be expected when anarchists attempt to do an
inherently authoritarian task, they do a piss-poor job… Why not leave charity
work to those who have no illusions about it? Anarchists would do better to
find ways of sharing individually if they are so moved, ways which encourage
self-determination rather than dependence and affinity rather than pity.

There is nothing anarchist about “Food Not Bombs”. Even the name is a demand
being made to the authorities. This is why its organizers so frequently use
civil disobedience — it is an attempt to appeal to the consciences of those in
power, to get them to feed and house the poor.

There is nothing in this program that encourages self-determination. There is
nothing that would encourage the beneficiaries to refuse that role and begin
to take what they want and need without following the rules. “Food Not Bombs”,
like every other charity, encourages its beneficiaries to remain passive
recipients rather than becoming active creators of their own lives. Charity
must be recognized for what it is: another aspect of the institutionalized
humiliation inherent in our economized existence which must be destroyed so we
can fully live.

## The Bourgeois Roots of Anarcho Syndicalism

> “We favor the development of a worker’s movement based on direct democracy,
> not just because it will be more effective in the present day fight against
> the employing class, but also because it foreshadows — and lays the basis
> for — a society of freedom and equality, without authoritarianism or
> exploitation.”
>
> From a flyer put out by the Workers Solidarity Alliance, an
> anarcho-syndicalist organization.

In the fourteenth or fifteenth century a social transformation began to take
place which reached its dramatic peak in the American War of Independence and
the French Revolution. This period was the uprising of the bourgeoisie against
the feudal system and the power of the Catholic Church. In place of feudalism,
the economic system of capitalism and the political system of political
democracy arose. Rather than allow a non-elected aristocracy or a king to
rule, liberal democracy demands that “the people” rule through their
representatives or their vote. Like the anarcho-syndicalists quoted above, the
bourgeoisie wanted a “society of freedom and equality, without
authoritarianism or exploitation.” Leave out the parts about “workers” and
“the employing class” and Thomas Paine might have written the quote.

Of course, the anarcho-syndicalists will tell us that they aren’t using the
words in the way the bourgeois revolutionaries did. I’d take them at their
word if it weren’t for the fact that anarcho-syndicalism reflects bourgeois
ideology in much more significant ways than merely borrowing its terminology.
The values upheld by anarcho-syndicalists do not significantly differ from
those of the more radical of the bourgeois liberal theorists, and their
project, upon examination, proves to be merely the extension of the liberal
project.

As I’ve already said, the economic system that came to power with the
bourgeoisie is capitalism. I won’t go into a lengthy description of capitalism
— suffice it to say that the defining quality of capitalism, as compared with
other economic systems, is not the existence of capitalists but the production
of excess capital allowing for continued economic expansion. Capitalism is a
highly moral system — that is to say it requires values which take priority
over individual needs, desires or greed in order to expand smoothly. These
values which are essential to capitalist expansion are production and
progress. Every technological advance is, thus, to be embraced unless it can
be shown to be a threat to further expansion of capital. Essential to
production and progress is work and so the bourgeois highly value work — and,
contrary to the image painted by “radical” labour propagandists, it is not
uncommon for capitalists to work many more hours than industrial workers, but
it’s organizational rather than productive work. Those who manage to avoid
work are the moral scum of capitalist society — parasites off the working
people.

Anarcho-syndicalists embrace every one of these capitalist values. Their goal
is “the real human mastery of production.” In spite of the high level of
anthropological evidence to the contrary, they assume that primal people spent
most of their time just striving to survive and that it is only thanks to the
production of technology and its progress that we can live the wonderful lives
we all do now, and enjoy all the lovely commodities — oops! Sorry, I’m waxing
sarcastic! The syndicalists recognize a few specific technologies as threats
to survival but see technology in general and progress in general as positive
things. In light of this, it is no surprise that they rhapsodize over work,
because without work there would be no production or progress. Like the
bourgeoisie, they see those who avoid work as “parasites.” (See Chaze Bufe’s
*Listen Anarchist!*) The only real problem they have with the capitalist
system is who’s in charge — they’d prefer the One Big Capitalist, the
international union of working people, rather than various individuals,
corporations and states to be in charge. But the basic structure would be the
same. Like the bourgeoisie — and maybe even more than the bourgeoisie — the
anarcho-syndicalists embrace the values essential to capitalism.

If production and progress are positive values, making work essential, then
social conformity is equally essential. I’ve already said that work avoidance
is seen as parasitism. Any pleasure that cannot be commodified and so brought
under the control of production is unethical. The vagabond, the tramp, the
gypsy, the outlaw, any individual who makes no positive contribution to
society is condemned as a failure or a criminal. Even the bohemian — the
non-conforming artist, musician or poet — is suspect in bourgeois eyes — at
least until a way is found to recuperate their renegade creative urges.

This same attitude towards those who don’t fit into society is held by anarcho
syndicalists. Chaz Bufe1s castigation of “marginals” in *Listen Anarchist!*
makes this quite clear. The way the CNT constantly put down the anarchist
outlaw Sabate (while continuing to take and use the money he gave them from
his robberies) is truly disgusting. Throughout its history,
anarcho-syndicalism has tried to quench the fire of unruly rebels, sometimes
through persuasion and sometime through insult, to move anarchic rebels to
conform and to accept society. Wherever anarchic rebellion went beyond the
reforms the anarcho-syndicalist were calling, these supposed non-believers in
law would be the first to cry, “Criminal! Terrorists!” Like the bourgeoisie,
they want production to progress smoothly, and that requires social
conformity.

Hand in hand with social conformity goes a love for social peace. It is true
that the bourgeoisie has exploited wars between nations to expand capital, but
this is always precarious since any violence can upset the smooth running of
capitalism. Only violence instituted by the proper authorities with a rational
and ethical basis has any place in bourgeois society. Personal conflicts are
not only not to include physical violence but should be polite, dealt with
through rational discussion, negotiation or due process. Certainly passions
should not flare. The social peace is to be broken only under the most extreme
of circumstances.

Anarcho-syndicalists also value social peace. From Luigi Fabbril's *Bourgeois
Influences in Anarchism* to Bufe’s *Listen Anarchist!*, they try to warn
anarchists away from violent verbal expression — ironically, trying to claim
that this springs not from false conceptions of anarchism created by the
bourgeois press — why they think people with courage and intelligence to rebel
against authority would accept the word of the bourgeois press, I don’t know.
Like the bourgeoisie, the anarcho-syndicalists call on us to express our
disagreements rationally, free of passion, in a peaceable way. Any active,
violent expression of individual rebellion is considered irresponsible,
counter-revolutionary and unethical by the anarcho syndicalists. The
perpetrators are labeled, at best, as dupes and more often as common criminals
and terrorists. In fact, outside of a “revolutionary situation,”
anarcho-syndicalists reject most form of illegal activity as
counter-productive (but is that necessarily bad?). Only the uprising of the
working class (the “proper authority” in anarcho-syndicalist theory) can
justify violence — and that violence must be rational and ethical so as to
keep the instruments of production intact and make as smooth of a transition
as possible to anarcho-syndicalist production.

Anarcho-syndicalists also wish to create a rational, ethical society. They
call on us to “attack irrationality… wherever and whenever it arises.” The
problem they see with the present society is that it is not rational or
ethical enough. Since reason is the source of ethical behavior (in their
view), it must prevail in all areas of life. Not our passions or desires, but
our “rational self-interest” should be our guide, say the syndicalists,
echoing the utilitarians. It is both more rational and more ethical if the
producer controls the means of production, they proclaim, blithely ignoring
the question of whether it is possible for anyone to control the means of
production in industrial society.

Both bourgeois liberal theorists and anarcho-syndicalists want a rational,
ethical society based on freedom, equality and justice, guaranteeing human
rights. Both want a smoothly running economy with high levels of production
guaranteeing scientific and technological progress. Both require social peace
and conformity to realize their projects. It is difficult not to think that
their projects are the same. I see only two significant differences. The
bourgeoisie sees the economy as an apolitical force that can progress
efficiently and ethically in the form of private enterprise. The
anarcho-syndicalists recognize the economy as a political force which must,
therefor, be run democratically. The bourgeois liberals believe that
representational democracy can create their ideal. Anarcho-syndicalists
believe that democracy must be direct — though they never seem to ask us if we
want to spend time directly voting on every social issue that comes up. The
project of the anarcho-syndicalists is really just an extension of the project
of the project of bourgeois liberalism — an attempt to push that project
toward its logical conclusion.

This brings me to the final parallel between bourgeois liberalism and anarcho
syndicalism, a parallel not of ideas, but of ignorance. Neither seems capable
of recognizing the realities of the social system we live under. “The every
day activity of slaves reproduces slavery” (Fredy Perlman). While talking
about freedom and democracy, the bourgeois liberal and the anarcho-syndicalist
both only see the human authorities that control them; they are blind to the
social activities in which they participate which are the real source of their
slavery. Thus, the bourgeois liberal is content to get rid of priests and
kings, and the anarcho-syndicalist throws in presidents and bosses. But the
factories remain intact, the stores remain intact (though the syndicalists may
call them distribution centers), the family remains intact — the entire social
system remains intact. If our daily activity has not significantly changed —
and the anarcho-syndicalists give no indication of wanting to change it beyond
adding the burden of managing the factories to that of managing the factories
to that of working in them — then what difference does it make if there are no
bosses? — We’re still slaves! The “name-change does not exorcise the beast.”
But there is a reason why the bourgeois liberal nor the anarcho-syndicalist
can see the slavery inherent in the social system. They do not see freedom as
the ability of the unique individual to create her/his life as s/he chooses.
They see it as the ability of the individual to become a fully and actively
integrated part of a progressive, rational society. “Slavery is freedom” is
not an aberration of Stalinist of fascist thinking; it is inherent in al
perspectives which ascribe freedom to society rather than to the individual.
The only way to guarantee the “freedom” of such societies is to suppress
non-conformity and rebellion wherever they arise. The anarcho-syndicalists may
talk of abolishing the state, but they will have to reproduce every one of its
functions to guarantee the smooth running of their society.
Anarcho-syndicalism does not make a radical break with the present society. It
merely seeks to extend this society1s values so they dominate us more fully in
our daily lives. All true rebels, the renegades, outlaws and wild free spirits
could no more accept an anarcho-syndicalist society than the present one. We
would have to continue raising hell, creating a radical break with society,
because we don’t want more control over our slavery — and that1s all the
anarcho-syndicalists offer us — we want to throw off the chains and live our
lives to the full.

## Insurgent Ferocity: The Playful Violence of Rebellion

> “We don’t just talk about violence; it is our element, our everyday fate…
> the conditions we are forced to live in…”
>
> — Os Cangacieros

Social control is impossible without violence. Society produces systems of
rationaized violence to socialize individuals — to make them into useful
resources for society, While some of these systems, such as the military, the
plolice and the penal system can still be viewed separately due to the blatant
harshness of their violence, for the most part these systems have become
sointerconnected and so pervasive that they act as a single totality — the
totality which is the society in which we live.

This systemic violence exists mostly as a constant underlying threat — a
subtle, even boring, everyday terrorism which incuces a fear of stepping out
of line. The signs and orders from “superiors” which threaten us with
punishment or poverty, the armed, uniformed thugs who are there to “protect
and serve” (huh!?!), the barrage of headlines about wars, torture, serial
killers and streeet gangs, all immerse us in an atmosphere of subtle,
underlying, rationalized social violence which causes us to fear and repress
our own violent passions.

In light of the systematic social violence that surrounds us, it’s no surprise
that people are fooled into viewing all violence as a single, monolithic
entity rather than as specific acts or ways of relating. The system of
violnece produced by society does become a monolith which acts to perpetuate
itself.

In reaction to this monolithic system of violence, the “pathology of pacifism”
develops. Unable to see beyond social catagories, the pacifist creates a false
dichotomy, limiting the question of violence to the ethical/intellectual
choice between as acceptance of violence as a monolithic system or the total
rejection of violence. But this choice exists only in the realm of worthless
abstactions, because in the world in which we actually live, pacifism and
systematic violence depend upon each other. Pacifism is an ideaology which
demands total social peace as its ultimate goal. But total social peace would
require the complete suppression of the individual passions that create
individual incidences of violence — and that would require total social
control. Total social control is only possible through the use of the constant
threat of the police, prison, therapy, social censure, scarcity or war. So the
pacifist ideal requires a monolithic system of violence and reflects the
social contradiction inherent in the necessity that authority strive to
maintain peace in order to maintain a smoothly running social system, but can
only do so by maintaining a rationalized system of violence.

The rational system of violence not only perpetuates itself, but also evokes
responses, often in the form of blind lashings out by enraged individuals,
which the system then manipulates into justifications for its own continual
existence, and occasionally in the form of consciously rebellios violence. The
passionate violence that is supressed turns in on the one feeling it, becoming
the the slow-killing, underlying violence of stress and anxiety. It is evident
in the millions of little pinpricks of humiliation that pass bewteen people on
the streets and in the public places of every city — looks of disgust and
hostility between strangers, and the verbal battle of wits exchanging guilt
and blame between supposed friends. This is the subtlest and most total form
of rationalised violence; everyone conforms out of fear of each others’
disgust. This is the subtle form of violence practiced by pacifists.

> “I do not dream of a gentle revolution. My passion runs to the violence of
> suppersession, the ferocity of a life that renounces nothing.”
>
> — Raoul Vaneigem

Those of us who are fighting for the freedom to create our lives for ourselves
need to reject both sides of the choice society offers between pacifism and
systematic violence, because this choice is an attempt to socialize our
rebellion. Instead we can create our own options, developing a playful and
passionate chaos of action and relating which may express itself at times with
intense and ferocious violence, at times with the gentlest tenderness, or
whatever way our passions and whims move us in the particular moment. Both the
rejection of violence and the systemization of violence are an attack on our
passions and uniqueness.

Violence is an aspect of animal interaction and observation of violence among
animals belies several generalizations. Violence among animals does not fit
into the the formula of social darwinism; there is no perpetual war of all
against all. Rather at specific moments under particular circumstances,
individual acts of violence flare up and then fade when the moments pass.
There is no systematic violence in the wild, but, instead, momentary
expressions of specific passions. This exposes one of the major fallacies of
pacifist ideology. Violence, in itself, does not perpetuate violence. The
social system of rationalized violence, of which pacifism is an integral part,
perpetuates itself as a system.

Against the system of violence, a non-systematized, passionate, playful
violence is the appropriate response. Violent play is very common among
animals and children. Chasing, wrestling and pouncing upon a playmate,
breaking, smashing and tearing apart things are all aspects of play that is
free of rules. The conscious insurgent plays this way as well, but with real
targets and with the intention of causing real damage. The targets of this
ferocious play in the present society would mainly be institutions,
commodities, social roles and cultural icons, but the human representatives of
these institutions can also be targets — especially where they present an
immediate threat to anyone’s freedom to create their life as they desire.

Rebellion has never been merely a matter of self-defense. In itself,
self-defense is probably best achieved by accepting the status quo of its
reform. Rebellion is the aggressive, dangerous, playful attack by
free-spirited individuals against society. Refusing a system of violence,
refusing an organized, militarized form of armed struggle, allows the violence
of insurgents to retain a high level of invisibility. It cannot be readily
understood by the authorities and brought under their control. Its insurgent
nature may even go undetected by the authorities as it eats away at the
foundations of social control. From the rationalized perspective of authority,
this playful violence will often appear utterly random, but actually is in
harmony with the desires of the insurgent. This playful violence of rebellion
kills “inadvertently as (one) strides out happily without looking back.”

The plauful violence of insurgence has no room for regret. Regret weakens the
force of blows and makes us cautious and timid. But regret only comes in when
violence is dealt with as a moral question, and for insurgents who are
fighting for the freedom to live their desires, morality is just another form
of social control. Wherever rebel violence has manifested playfully, regret
seems absurd. In riots (other than police riots) and spontaneous uprisings —
as well as in small-scale vandalism — a festive attitude seems to be evident.
There is an intense joy, even euphoria, in the release of violent passions
that have been pent up for so long. Bashing in the skull of society as we
experience it on a daily basis is an intense pleasure, and one to be savored,
not repudiated in shame, guilt or regret. Some may object that such an
attitude could cause our violence to get out of hand, but an excess of
insurgent violence is not something that we need to fear. As we break down our
repression and begin to free our passions, certainly our gestures, our actions
and our entire way of being are bound to become increasingly expansive and all
we do we will seem to do to excess. our generosity will seem excessive and our
violence will seem excessive. Unrepressed, expansive individuals squander in
all things. Riots and insurrections have failed to get beyond temporary
release, not because of excess, but becasue people hold themselves back.
People have not trusted their passions. They have feared the expansiveness,
the squandering excess of their own dreams and desires. So they have given up
or turned their fight over to new authorities, new systemizers of violence.
But how can insurgent violence ever be truly excessive when there is no
institution of social control, no aspect of authority, no icon of culture that
should not be smashed to powder — and that geefully?

If what we want is a world in which each of us can create our own lives free
of constraints, relating with each other as we desire rather than in
accordance with socially defined roles, we have to recognize that, at times,
violence will flare and that there is nothing wrong with that. Fullness of the
passions includes full and expansive expressions of hatred and rage — and
these are vilent emotions. Thogh this violence can be used tactically it will
not be systematic. Though it can be intelligent, it will not be rationalized.
And under no circumstances is it self-perpetuating, because it is individual
and temporary, spending itself fully in its free, passionate expression.
Neither moralistic non-violence nor the systematic violence of military
struggle can break down authority since both require some form of authority.
Only the expansive and passionate violence of insurgent individuals playing
alone or with each other has any chance of destroying this society…

> “Forward everyone!\
> And with arms and hearts,\
> Speech and pen, Dagger and rifle,\
> Irony and blasphemy,\
> Theft, poisoning and fire,\
> Let us make… war on society.”
>
> — Dejaque

## Fear of Conflict[^3]

> “Truly it is not a failing in you that you stiffen yourself against me and
> assert your distinctness or peculiarity: you need not give way or renounce
> yourself”
>
> — Max Stirner

Whenever more than a few anarchists get together, there are arguments. This is
no surprise, since the word “anarchist” is used to describe a broad range of
often contradictory ideas and practices. The only common denominator is the
desire to be rid of authority, and anarchists do not even agree on what
authority is, let alone the question of what methods are appropriate for
eliminating it. These questions raise many others, and so arguments are
inevitable.

The arguments do not bother me. What bothers me is the focus on trying to come
to an agreement. It is assumed that “because we are all anarchists”, we must
all really want the same thing; our apparent conflicts must merely be
misunderstandings which we can talk out, finding a common ground. When someone
refuses to talk things out and insists on maintaining their distinctness, they
are considered dogmatic. This insistence on finding a common ground may be one
of the most significant sources of the endless dialogue that so frequently
takes place of acting to create our lives on our own terms. This attempt to
find a common ground involves a denial very real conflicts.

One strategy frequently used to deny conflict is to claim that an argument is
merely a disagreeement over words and their meanings. As if the words one uses
and how one chooses to use them have no connection to one’s ideas, dreams and
desires. I am convinced that there are very few arguments that are merely
about words and their meanings. These few could be easily resolved if the
individuals involved would clearly and precisely explain what they mean. When
individuals cannot even come to an agreement about what words to use and how
to use them, it indicates that their dreams, desires and ways of thinking are
so far apart that even within a single language, they cannot find a common
tongue. The attempt to reduce such an immense chasm to mere semantics is an
attempt to deny a very real conflict and the singularity of the individuals
involved.

The denial of conflict and of the singularity of individuals may reflect a
fetish for unity that stems from residual leftism or collectivism. Unity has
always been highly valued by the left. Since most anarchists, despite their
attempts to seperate themselves from the left, are merely anti-state leftists,
they are convinced that only a united front can destroy this society which
perpetually forces us into unities not of our choosing, and that we must,
therefore, overcome our differences and join together to support the “common
cause”. But when we give give ourselves to the “common cause”, we are forced
to accept the lowest common denominator of understanding and struggle. The
unities that are created in this way are false unities which thrive only by
suppressing the unique desires and passions of the individuals involved,
tranforming them into a mass. Such unities are no different from the forming
of labor that keeps a factory functioning or the unity of social consensus
which keeps the authorities in power and people in line. Mass unity, because
it is based on the reduction of the individual to a unit in a generality, can
never be a basis for the destruction of authority, only for its support in one
form or another.

Since we want to destroy authority, we must start from a different basis.

For me, that basis is myself — my life with all of its passions and dreams,
its desires, projects and encounters. From this basis, I make “common cause”
with no one, but may frequently encounter individuals with whom I have an
affinity. It may well be that your desires and passions, your dreams and
projects coincide with mine. Accompanied by an insistence upon realizing these
in opposition to every form of authority, such affinity is a basis for a
genuine unity between singular, insurgent individuals which lasts only as long
as these individuals desire.

Certainly, the desire for the destruction of authority and society can move us
to strive for an insurrectional unity that becomes large-scale, but never as a
mass movement; instead it would need to be a coinciding of affinities between
individuals who insist on making their lives their own.

This sort of insurrection cannot come about through a reduction of our ideas
to a lowest common denominator with which everyone can agree, but only through
the recognition of the singularity of each individual, a recognition which
embraces the actual conflicts that exist between individuals, regardless of
how ferocious they may be, as part of the amazing wealth of interactions that
the world has to offer us once we rid ourselves of the social system which has
stolen our lives and our interactions from us.

## “Feral Revolution”[^4]

When I was a very young child, my life was filled with intense pleasure and a
vital energy that caused me to feel what I experienced to the full. I was the
center of this marvelous, playful existence and felt no need to rely on
anything but my own living experience to fulfill me.

I felt intensely, I experienced intensely, my life was a festival of passion
and pleasure. My disappointments and sorrows were also intense. I was born a
free, wild being in the midst of a society based upon domestication. There was
no way that I could escape being domesticated myself. Civilization will not
tolerate what is wild in its midst. But I never forgot the intensity that life
could be. I never forgot the vital energy that had surged through me. My
existence since I first began to notice that this vitality was being drained
away has been a warfare between the needs of civilized survival and the need
to break loose and experience the full intensity of life unbound.

I want to experience this vital energy again. I want to know the free-spirited
wildness of my unrepressed desires realizing themselves in festive play. I
want to smash down every wall that stands between me and the intense,
passionate life of untamed freedom that I want. The sum of these walls is
everything we call civilization, everything that comes between us and the
direct, participatory experience of the wild world. Around us has grown a web
of domination, a web of mediation that limits our experience, defining the
boundaries of acceptable production and consumption.

Domesticating authority takes many forms, some of which are difficult to
recognize. Government, capital and religion are some of the more obvious faces
of authority. But technology, work, language with its conceptual limits, the
ingrained habits of etiquette and propriety — these too are domesticating
authorities which transform us from wild, playful, unruly animals into tamed,
bored, unhappy producers and consumers. These things work in us insidiously,
limiting our imaginations, usurping our desires, suppressing our lived
experience. And it is the world created by these authorities, the civilized
world, in which we live. If my dream of a life filled with intense pleasure
and wild adventure is to be realized, the world must be radically transformed,
civilization must fall before expanding wilderness, authority must fall before
the energy of our wild freedom. There must be — for want of a better word — a
revolution.

But a revolution that can break down civilization and restore the vital energy
of untamed desire cannot be like any revolution of the past. All revolutions
to date have centered around power, its use and redistribution. They have not
sought to eradicate the social institutions that domesticate; at best they
have only sought to eradicate the power relationships within those
institutions. So revolutionaries of the past have aimed their attacks at the
centers of power seeking to overthrow it. Focused on power, they were blind to
the insidious forces of domination that encompass our daily existence and so,
when successful at overthrowing the powers that be, they ended up re-creating
them. To avoid this, we need to focus not on power, but on our desire to go
wild, to experience life to the full, to know intense pleasure and wild
adventure. As we attempt to realize this desire, we confront the real forces
of domination, the forces that we face every moment of every day. These forces
have no single center that can be overthrown. They are a web that binds us. So
rather than trying to overthrow the powers that be, we want to undermine
domination as we confront it every day, helping the already collapsing
civilization to break down more quickly and as it falls, the centers of power
will fall with it. Previous revolutionaries have only explored the well-mapped
territories of power. I want to explore and adventure in the unmapped, and
unmappable, territories of wild freedom. The revolution that can create the
world I want has to be a feral revolution.

There can be no programs or organizations for feral revolution, because
wildness cannot spring from a program or organization. Wildness springs from
the freeing of our instincts and desires, from the spontaneous expression of
our passions. Each of us has experienced the processes of domestication, and
this experience can give us the knowledge we need to undermine civilization
and transform our lives. Our distrust of our own experience is probably what
keeps us from rebelling as freely and actively as we’d like. We’re afraid of
fucking up, we’re afraid of our own ignorance. But this distrust and fear have
been instilled in us by authority. It keeps us from really growing and
learning.

It makes us easy targets for any authority that is ready to fill us.

To set up “revolutionary” programs is to play on this fear and distrust, to
reinforce the need to be told what to do. No attempt to go feral can be
successful when based on such programs. We need to learn to trust and act upon
our own feelings and experiences, if we are ever to be free.

So I offer no programs. What I will share is some thoughts on ways to explore.
Since we all have been domesticated, part of the revolutionary process is a
process of personal transformation. We have been conditioned not to trust
ourselves, not to feel completely, not to experience life intensely. We have
been conditioned to accept the humiliation of work and pay as inescapable, to
relate to things as resources to be used, to feel the need to prove ourselves
by producing. We have been conditioned to expect disappointment, to see it as
normal, not to question it. We have been conditioned to accept the tedium of
civilized survival rather than breaking free and really living. We need to
explore ways of breaking down this conditioning, of getting as free of our
domestication as we can now. Let’s try to get so free of this conditioning
that it ceases to control us and becomes nothing more than a role we use when
necessary for survival in the midst of civilization as we strive to undermine
it.

In a very general way, we know what we want. We want to live as wild, free
beings in a world of wild, free beings. The humiliation of having to follow
rules, of having to sell our lives away to buy survival, of seeing our usurped
desires transformed into abstractions and images in order to sell us
commodities fills us with rage. How long will we put up with this misery? We
want to make this world into a place where our desires can be immediately
realized, not just sporadically, but normally. We want to re-eroticize our
lives. We want to live not in a dead world of resources, but in a living world
of free wild lovers. We need to start exploring the extent to which we are
capable of living these dreams in the present without isolating ourselves.
This will give us a clearer understanding of the domination of civilization
over our lives, an understanding which will allow us to fight domestication
more intensely and so expand the extent to which we can live wildly.

Attempting to live as wildly as possible now will also help break down our
social conditioning. This will spark a wild prankishness in us which will take
aim at all that would tame it, undermining civilization and creating new ways
of living and sharing with each other. These explorations will expose the
limits of civilization’s domination and will show its inherent opposition to
freedom. We will discover possibilities we have never before imagined… vast
expanses of wild freedom. Projects, ranging from sabotage and pranks that
expose or undermine the dominant society, to the expansion of wilderness, to
festivals and orgies and general free sharing, can point to amazing
possibilities.

Feral revolution is an adventure. It is the daring exploration of going wild.
It takes us into unknown territories for which no maps exist. We can only come
to know these territories if we dare to explore them actively. We must dare to
destroy whatever destroys our wildness and to act on our instincts and
desires. We must dare to trust in ourselves, our experiences and our passions.
Then we will not let ourselves be chained or penned in. We will not allow
ourselves to be tamed. Our feral energy will rip civilization to shreds and
create a life of wild freedom and intense pleasure.

## The Liberation of Motion Through Space

Time is a system of measurement, which is to say, a ruler, and authority.
There is a reason why, during many insurrections, clocks have been smashed and
calendars burned. There was a semi-conscious recognition on the part of the
insurgents that these devices represented the authority against which they
rebelled as much as did the kings or presidents, the cops or soldiers. But it
never took long for new clocks and calendars to be created, because inside the
heads of the insurgents the concept of time still ruled.

Time is a social construction which is used to measure motion through space in
order to control it and bind it to a social context. Whether it be the motions
of the sun, moon, stars and planets across the skies, the motions of
individuals over the terrains they wander, or the motions of events across the
artifices know as days, weeks, months and years, time is the means by which
these motions are bound to social utility. The destruction of time is
essential to the liberation of individuals from the social context, to the
liberation of individuals as conscious, autonomous creators of their own
lives.

The revolt against time is nothing if it is not a revolt against the
domination of time in one’s daily life. It calls for a transformation of the
ways in which one moves through the spaces one encounters. Time dominates our
motion through space by means of “necessary” destinations, schedules and
appointments. As long as the social context which produced time as a means of
social control continues to exist, it is doubtful that any of us will be able
to completely eradicate destinations, schedules or appointments from our
lives. But on examination of how these modes of interaction affect the ways
one moves through space could help one create a more conscious motion. The
most notable effect of having to get somewhere (destination), especially when
one has to be there by a certain time (schedule/appointment), is a lack of
awareness of the terrain over which one is moving. Such motion tends to be a
sort of sleep-walking from which the individual creates nothing, since the
destination and the schedule pre-exist the journey and define it. One is only
conscious of here surroundings and how they are affecting her to the minimal
extent necessary to get where she is going. I don’t deny that many of the
environments through which one may move, especially in an urban setting, can
be disturbingly ugly, making such unconsciousness aesthetically appealing, but
this lack of consciousness causes one to miss many chances for subversion and
play that might otherwise be created.

Subverting one’s motion through space, making it one’s own, freed from the
bondage to time, is a matter of creating this motion as nomadic motion rather
than self-transportation. Nomadic motion makes a playful (though often
serious) exploration of the terrain over which one is passing the essential
aspect of the journey. The wanderer interacts with the places through which
she passes, consciously changing and being changed by them. Destination, even
when it exists, is of little importance, since it too will be a place though
which one passes. As this form of motion through space becomes one’s usual
way, it may enhance one’s wits, allowing one to become less and less dependent
upon destinations, appointments, schedules and the other fetters that enforce
the rule of time over our motions. Part of this enhancement of the nomad’s
wits within the present time dominated context is learning to create ways to
play around time, subverting it and using it against itself to enhance one’s
free wandering.

A radically different way of experiencing living occurs when we are
consciously creating time for ourselves. Due to the limits of a language
developed within this time-dominated social context, this way of experiencing
life is often spoken of in temporal terms as well, but as a subjective “time”,
as in: “The time when I was climbing Mount Hood…” But I’d rather not refer to
this as subjective “time” since it has no shared purpose with social time. I
prefer to call it “nomadic experience”. Within nomadic experience, the peaks,
the valleys and the plateaus are not created in steady, measurable cycles.
They are passionate interactions of the sort which may make one moment an
eternity and the next several weeks a mere eye-blink. On this passionate
journey, the sun still rises and sets, the moon still waxes and wanes, plants
still flower and bear fruit and wither, but not as measurable cycles. Instead,
one experiences these events in terms of one’s passionate and creative
interactions with them. Without any destination to define one’s motion through
space, linear time becomes meaningless as well. Nomadic experience is outside
of time, not in a mystical sense, but in the recognition that time is the
mystification of motion through space and, like all mystifications, usurps our
ability to create ourselves.

A conscious, playful, exploratory creation of our own motions through space,
of our own interactions with the places we pass through, is the necessary
practice of the revolt against time — nothing less than creating events and
their language. Until we begin to transform ourselves into nomadic creators of
this sort in the way we live our lives, every smashed clock and every burned
calendar will simply be replaced, because time will continue to dominate the
way we live.

## Beyond Earth First! Toward a feral revolution of desire[^5]

Last year, Fifth Estate published a critique of Deep Ecology which included
criticisms of certain people who use the slogan “Earth First!”. This has led
to a fairly intense dialogue. As I have read this dialogue it has become clear
to me that most people — including those who call themselves EF!ers-aren’t
really sure what EF! is.

A number of letters and one article (“‘Live Wild or Die’ — The Other Earth
First!,” Fifth Estate, Vol. 23, \#3) attempted to show that EF! was not
monolithic, that it was a movement rather than an organization. Yet the
writers of these pieces spoke of “what EF! actually does” and, in the article,
of EF!’s “split personality” — as though EF! were indeed a single entity, a
monolithic organization. To clear this up, it is necessary to figure out just
what EF! is.

There is an EF! that is an organization. This is what Mikal called the
“centralized personality” of Earth First! in his FE article. This EF! consists
of the editorial staff of the national paper and the “stars” of EF! They
create a major portion of the public image of what EF! is all about. And their
recent right-wing Malthusian ravings have not helped that image one bit.

There is another Earth First! — however that EF! is not a movement. The real
movement is an anti-authoritarian, anti-industrial-civilization,
pro-wilderness movement, and people of Fifth Estate are as much a part of that
movement as anyone else who chooses to use the slogan “Earth First!” To claim
that a slogan creates a separate movement with an inside and an outside
defined by the use of the slogan is a mystification. As Mikal said in his
article, the defining quality of a movement is that it moves. Everyone who is
active in any way in opposing civilization and striving to expand wildness is
participating in that movement and needs to criticize any part of that
movement that is stifling the liberation of wildness.

So what do I think Earth First! is? It is a slogan around which some people
rally. Just what this slogan means and why people need it as a rallying point
needs to be examined.

“Earth First!,” the slogan is a simple, two word proclamation of biocentrism.
Biocentrism is an ideology, an attempt to claim that we can act from a basis
other than our own needs, desires and experiences. We cannot put earth first.
When we claim to do so, we are only putting our concept of the earth first.
Robert Anton Wilson and Timothy Leary have both claimed to have connected with
the consciousness of the universe and have used this claim to justify their
vision of paradise as a horrendous, sterile techno-topia, saying that is the
“natural course of evolution.” I share a vision similar to many EF!ers, but
their claim to know the earth’s will is false consciousness, ideology, and all
ideology is a threat to wildness.

Why do people so distrust their own instincts and desires that they have to
create false consciousness to justify themselves? Why do they need to claim
that they are doing what they are doing because they put “Earth First!”?
Civilization, with its need to suppress whatever is wild, has taught us to
distrust our instincts and desires. It needs to do this in order to channel
our wild energies into the domesticated activities of work and commodity
consumption — the activities that are destroying wildness everywhere. So the
best thing we can do for wilderness is to let our own wildness break free by
trusting and acting on our own instincts and desires. To be trapped in the
ideology of a slogan is to chain our radical consciousness and to stifle our
movement.

By equating the slogan with a movement, speaking of the movement as a
monolithic being that acts on its own, defining participation in the movement
in terms of use of the slogan rather than people’s activities, the image of
EF! as an organization is created whether such an organization actually exists
or not. The Tucson crew reinforces this image by creating a visible
bureaucracy, but even without them — the image would exist because EF! is
spoken of in organizational terms even by those who claim it is not one. So an
image has been created which the media can use to create a good guy / bad guy
scenario. And thanks to Foreman, Abbey and other EF! stars, the image of a
monolithic organization of crackpot, racist eco-terrorists is becoming
dominant. Give the press a name and claim that it represents a single movement
and they will see an organization there. And when even those who claim that
Earth First! is not a monolithic organization speak of it in monolithic,
organizational terms, can anything else be expected?

To summarize my thoughts:

1.  The slogan, “Earth First!” needs to be left behind because it reflects
    false consciousness. We always act from our own needs, desires and
    experiences. When we recognize that in terms of our radical activity, we
    free that activity from any ideological constraints.

2.  The slogan needs to be left behind because it has created an image that
    allows the media to manipulate the public’s conception of those who act in
    the slogan’s name.

3.  The slogan needs to be left behind because it is associated with the
    redneck, macho, racist posturings of Abbey, Foreman and others.

4.  The slogan needs to be left behind because it creates the image of a
    movement whose only basis is the use of that slogan, creating an
    insider/outsider dichotomy that allows “insiders” to write off the
    criticisms of “outsiders” without giving them much thought.

5.  It needs to be recognized that the actual movement, of which those who use
    the slogan, “EF!” are part, is a movement to save what is wild from
    civilization. Many of us who have criticized the ideology that has been
    associated with EF! are active participants in that movement, so our
    criticisms are not those of outsiders.

6.  It needs to be recognized that “Earth First!” is merely a slogan, a
    rallying cry. It does nothing concrete. Individual people, acting
    separately or together, are the ones doing things of actual significance.
    In order to avoid the image of being a monolithic organization, we have to
    be careful to make this clear.

We need to go beyond the false consciousness of the idea, Earth First! and
recognize that only by setting our own wild instincts and desires free can
wilderness be saved. Ours is a revolution of desire, a feral revolution. We do
not do it for anything supposedly greater than ourselves; we do it for
ourselves. So, come on, anarchic adventurers, let’s go wild!

## The Last Word[^6]

> “When you launch information you become information yourself.”
>
> — Adilkno

Yes, it is possible to be possessed… not by demons, spirits, or other alleged
supernatural entities. No, what possesses us, undermining any attempt at
autonomous self-creation, is identity. This thing with no life of its own
rides us to our deaths as though we were underfed, abused horses in the
clutches of some hobgoblin.

In the game of insurgence — a lived guerilla war game — it is strategically
necessary to use identities and roles. Unfortunately, the context of social
relationships gives these roles and identities the power to define the
individual who attempts to use them. So I, Feral Faun, became… an anarchist… a
writer… a Stirner-influenced, post-situationist, anti-civilization theorist…
if not in my own eyes, at least in the eyes of most people who’ve read my
writings.

I took on these identities only semi-consciously, with little awareness of the
pitfalls I would encounter. They did not become tools I could use to create
interactions with others which integrated practice, analysis, and passion into
a game of conscious insurgence and lay aside when they ceased to be useful.
Rather, these identities became armors glued onto me which prevented the
possibility of real interactions… replacing them with the absurd relationships
of the identified in which individuals do not revel in each other’s
uniqueness, but rather find comfort in some shallow image of similarity. In
such relationships, passion, intensity, love, amazement, cruelty, and real
critical interaction have no place. The game of conscious insurgence gets
replaced by a game of simulated rage and ritualized protest over all the
appropriate issues — that is, the game of anarchist activism.

Well, I’m tired… tired of being ridden by the hobgoblin of identity, tired of
half-assed interactions where no one really teaches anyone, tired of the
simulated rage and ritualized reactivism which tries to pass itself off as
insurgence, tired of social contexts which are always boxes which isolate me
by naming me, tired of being information to people rather than flesh and blood
and desire and passion and intensity. By the time you read this, Feral Faun
will no longer be… this is the last word.

## Some Not Completely Aimless Meanderings[^7]

It’s time to think about writing another column. There are a lot of topics
worth examining — topics to which I have given a lot of thought and which are
fundamental to understanding and opposing authority. But I have no desire to
put energy into examining these topics right now. There are times when I know
exactly why I’m writing. I get a real pleasure out of making my explorations
coherent enough to express them to others. I look forward to the possibility
of stimulating and challenging discourse… but at the moment, this isn’t the
case. Not I don’t want to express myself coherently or be involved in
challenging discourse. But, at the moment, I’m not convinced that my recent
writings are doing that for me.

Recently, I was at an anarchist gathering in Long Beach, California. There was
much that could be criticized about the gathering, but I got involved in
several intelligent, humorous and challenging discussions-even in the context
of workshops! Due to a lack of p.c. and process fetishists, it seemed much
easier to get to the heart of what was being discussed, and most people did
not take offense at passionate expressions of differences. But, around this
same time, I learned that articles I had written were being thoroughly
misunderstood. I came across responses to my pieces which described my
writings as ‘Marxist’, ‘economistic’ or ‘moralistic’. This reminded me of the
time when a reviewer described two pamphlets I’d written as attempts to
“create a new religion” when I was trying to reclaim for myself what religion
usurps and places in the realm of the ‘spiritual’. Although much of this
misinterpretation of my writings can be attributed to projections of some
people’s ideological blind-spots, it is still frustrating to see my attempts
to express an explicitly amoral, anti-economistic critique being interpreted
as the opposite.

Language often frustrates me. Every language that exists in the civilized
world developed within the context of authoritarian relationships. Those of us
who wish to challenge such relationships and express the possibility of free
relating outside the context of authority can’t help but twist, contort and
play with the language we use. In a sense, we create a new language, a
language which we hope expresses the possibilities the old language tends to
suppress. This is bound to lead to some misunderstandings. I know that most of
the readers of my writings are either anarchists or anarchist sympathizers. I
also know, from extensive interaction with anarchists, that most anarchists
‘think’ and talk in the terms of discourse created by society, by the system
of relationships and roles that is authority. They are anarchists because they
hate the government, the state, all bosses and hierarchy, but they haven’t
conceived of the possibility that authority may run much deeper than this —
that it may be the entire system of relationships and values that is society
as we know it, a system into which we were all integrated to one extent or
another… and that it may be the very language which we’ve been taught to use
to speak… about everything. So I guess I shouldn’t be surprised that my
attempts to twist this language against itself, into a language that can
express rebellion and the possibility of real life, a language that is my own,
should be misinterpreted. It’s probably far more surprising that anyone else ever
understands what I write, even partially. But I’ll try to clarify things a bit
more by reiterating things I’ve said a million times as plainly as possible,
which is to say, now I’m really gonna rant….

There are people who are anarchists in the sense of being believers in
anarchism. Their anarchism consists of a moral and/or social system which they
wish to create and expand into a worldwide system of relationships. This ideal
forces them to morally oppose those aspects of this society which are in
contradiction to their values. I am not an anarchist in this sense and have
not been since 1981. But we’ve all heard of pianists, cellists and guitarists
— so why not be an anarchist in this sense, one who plays anarchy? Let me
explain. The simplest definition of anarchy is “no authority.” Where there is
no authority, a myriad of possibilities that cannot exist under authority
suddenly open up. If authority is the entire system of relationships that
produces, reproduces and is society, then to “play anarchy” is to create
situations in which this system breaks down and to extend such situations as
far as circumstances allow so that possibilities outside of structures of
authority can be discovered and played with. I want to do this for no other
reason than that it gives great pleasure and expands my life.

Several years ago, a friend of mine, who was not well-read in radical theory,
but who knew she was fed up with the rules and moralities anarchists tended to
make for themselves, said to me: “I’m not an anarchist! I’m a me-ist!” Kind of
sad that, even among those who claim to oppose authority, it seems necessary
to make an ‘ism’ out of living, doing and rebelling for oneself. But with all
the moralistic drivel that passes itself off as anarchism, it is necessary to
keep on harping on the fact that for me this ain’t a question of ‘good’ and
‘evil’, ‘right’ and ‘wrong’, ‘justice’ and ‘injustice’ — though I may chose to
play with some of these concepts if it pleases me; it’s a matter of how I want
to live…. Even freedom is of value to me only because the fewer restrictions
there are on me as I pursue the possibilities I want to pursue, the fuller and
more wonderful my life can be. If my egoism is expansive, it is because your
pleasure gives me pleasure — not because I’m an altruist.

But what about greed, selfishness and wealth? One of the most banal
falsifications of moral anarchists is their attempt to explain the economic
realities of capital in terms of individual “moral failings.” The only problem
with greed as it exists in this society is that it isn’t greedy enough! The
capitalist, the corporate executive and the power monger merely take a huge
chunk of the impoverished reality offered by society, and mete out smaller
portions of the same to everyone else. In the process, they lose themselves by
becoming nothing more than their roles and destroy the wealth they could enjoy
by making it into resources and capital. Their ‘greed’ is much more the
desperate addictive need of those who know they have become nothing g the need
to make everything into nothing. I am pissed off at them, not because they are
greedy, but because the limited and impoverished nature of their greed is
destroying the world of real wealth for which I am greedy. You see, I want the
universe to be mine. I want to encompass everything, every passion, every
desire, every being into myself — I have a boundless greed! But no economy can
make this possible. In economic systems, things can only be owned as property.
Property means limited ownership of limited things. What is one’s property is
always far less than what is not one’s property, so property always means
poverty. Wealth can only exist where there is no property and where no
economic relationships exist — where I can make everything my own and you can
make everything your own — and included in what I make my own is your pleasure
in making everything your own. In economic systems, greed is small, petty and
contractive and generosity appears to be altruistic. But beyond economic
relationships, greed is expansive and wants to have and enjoy the other’s
enjoyment, and generosity is the greatest form of selfishness as your pleasure
becomes my pleasure.

So my writing, like everything I do, is an attempt to express an expansive
selfishness — to get something I want I haven’t the least interest in winning
people over to the cause of anarchy, nor of winning other anarchists over to
my opinions. What I’m interested in is participating in a challenging
discourse that can be part of a radical practice that challenges society in
its totality by creating an expansive, anti-economic selfishness. I am
arrogant enough to say that such a discourse requires a certain minimal
understanding to be truly challenging and that I’m not the least bit
interested in wasting time arguing with those without that understanding.
These meanderings touch on some of these matters. I’ll be using this column to
expand on this in the future.

## Paneroticism: The Dance of Life[^8]

Chaos is a dance, a flowing dance of life, and this dance is erotic.
Civilization hates chaos and, therefore, also hates Eros. Even in supposedly
sexually free times, civilization represses the erotic. It teaches that
orgasms are events that happen only in a few small parts of our bodies and
only through the correct manipulation of those parts. It squeezes Eros into
the armor of Mars, making sex into a competitive, achievement-centered job
rather than joyful, innocent play.

Yet even in the midst of such repression, Eros refuses to accept this mold.
His joyful, dancing form breaks through Mars’ armor here and there. As blinded
as we are by our civilized existence, the dance of life keeps seeping into our
awareness in little ways. We look at a sunset, stand in the midst of the
forest, climb on a mountain, hear a bird song, walk barefoot on a beach, and
we start to feel a certain elation, a sense of awe and joy. It is the
beginning of an orgasm of the entire body, one not limited to civilization’s
so-called “erogenous zones”, but civilization never lets the feeling fulfill
itself. Otherwise, we’d realize that everything that is not a product of
civilization is alive and joyfully erotic.

But a few of us are slowly awakening from the anesthesia of civilization. We
are becoming aware that every stone, every tree, every river, every animal,
every being in the universe is not only just as alive, but at present is more
alive than we who are civilized beings. This awareness is not just
intellectual. It can’t be or civilization will just turn into another academic
theory. We are feeling it. We have heard the love-songs of rivers and
mountains and have seen the dances of trees. We no longer want to use them as
dead things, since they are very much alive. We want to be their lovers, to
join in their beautiful, erotic dance. It scares us. The death-dance of
civilization freezes every cell, every muscle within us. We know we will be
clumsy dancers and clumsy lovers. We will be fools. But our freedom lies in
our foolishness. If we can be fools, we have begun to break civilizations
chains, we have begun to lose our need to achieve. With no need to achieve, we
have time to learn the dance of life; we have time to become lovers of trees
and rocks and rivers. Or, more accurately, time cease to exist for us; the
dance becomes our lives as we learn to love all that lives. And unless we
learn to dance the dance of life, all our resistance to civilization will be
useless. Since it will still govern within us, we will just re-create it.

So let’s dance the dance of life. Let’s dance clumsily without shame, for
which of us civilized people isn’t clumsy? Let’s make love to rivers, to
trees, to mountains with our eyes, our toes, our hands, our ears. Let every
part of our bodies awaken to the erotic ecstasy of life’s dance. We’ll fly.
We’ll dance. We’ll heal. We’ll find that our imaginations are strong , that
they are part of the erotic dance that can create the world we desire.

## Drifting away from the sacred: Thoughts inspired by reading Peter Lamborn Wilson’s The Sacred Drift[^9]

My feelings when I read Peter Lamborn Wilson is that he wishes to live very
much as I do, yet he looks to thc realm of spirituality as a means to achieve
this. To me, it is evident that this is another false path to autonomous
self-creation — precisely because it is a path… and one that has been tried so
often its failure should be self-evident.

The surrealists called for divergence from all known paths, yet their project
proved to be absurd because they sought the marvelous in a passive way outside
of any “spiritual” context. Nineteenth century materialism made the mistake of
killing god without reclaiming what god had stolen from human beings and from
the world. This left a wasteland. The surrealist attempt to use a kind of
materialistic mysticism to reclaim this was bound to fail, in part because of
its passivity and in part because of its reliance on the Freudian
“unconscious” as the realm from which the marvelous would spring.

The “unconscious” realm. like the “spiritual” realm, is a social creation
which relegates aspects of our lives which would best be left open and
accessible to a “hidden”, “other” realm…. But Freud never even considered
claiming what had been relegated to the “spiritual” for the “unconscious.”
When Jung did so, he did it merely by equating the “spiritual” with his highly
questionable construct, the “collective unconscious” — thus, reclaiming
nothing.

The surrealists had no use for Jung’s extension of religion’s existence. But
they also never recognized the banality of the Freudian unconscious — the
marvelous is not there except on rare occasions by accident. The marvelous
will only become an everyday reality when we reclaim for our everyday lives
that aspect of living that has been relegated to nonquotidian realms…. This
reclamation involves the active creation of marvelous, passionate
intensities — not mere passive waiting.

It is the individual’s capability for active, conscious, empassioned creation
which was usurped to create the realm of the “spiritual” and was, thus,
relegated to virtual non-existence. With the creation of gods all creative
power was taken from the individual and invested in these invented beings —
and their earthly representations. The marvelous was turned into a gift from
elsewhere.

The development of god coincides with the development of social control. God
is, in fact, very much like society: neither one exists in itself — god exists
only in the belief of the religious, and society exists only in the activities
of social individuals. Yet god and society enforce the activities which
continue their reproduction. The difference is that god exists only in the
realm of belief — or ideas — whereas society exists in the realm of material
interactions and so creates relationships which coerce even those who oppose
social control into reproducing social control.

Capitalism has exposed the material basis of social interactions at the same
time as it has created material social mechanisms to motivate people to
continue social reproduction. In other words, god and the spiritual are no
longer necessary mystifications to enforce social reproduction. But the social
mechanisms created by capitalism do not and cannot transform individuals into
the conscious, autonomous creators of their own lives and interactions. Rather
individuals are transformed into cogs in the mechanisms. God and spirituality
remain as a solace (Marx’s “opiate”), an escape and a facet of one’s social
identity (i.e., an ideological commodity). Stealing back the creative energy
from the “spiritual realm” now is equivalent to taking back the power to
consciously create one’s life and interactions from society. But it is
essential that we not forget that this war against society includes an attack
upon the citadel of spirituality.

Recent revivals of mysticism, paganism and shamanism among certain radicals
may be misguided attempts at reclaiming their lives, but they appear to me to
be a retreat in to a fantasy realm in the face of seemingly overwhelming
social forces. These revivals indicate the continued lack of confidence of
those involved in their ability to create their own lives, their own
monuments, their own interactions. It may also indicate a fear of the
unknown — a preference for models, for paths, for systems of guidance —
because in a world of autonomous creators, or unique free individuals, there
are no guarantees; nothing is certain; all of the maps. definitions and
paradigms disintegrate… such a world is a world of terror and of wonder. For
the courageous, mostly the latter.

## Whither now? Some thoughts on creating anarchy[^10]

> “Any society that you build will have its limits. And outside the limits of
> any society the unruly and heroic tramps will wander with their wild and
> virgin thoughts… planning ever new and dreadful outbursts of rebellion.”
>
> — Renzo Novatore

I feel that there is no possible society in which I would fit, that whatever
society was like, I would be a rebel. At times, this fills me with the joy of
the “unruly and heroic tramps” of whom Renzo Navatore speaks, but often it
leaves me feeling quite lonely and isolated.

I live in a “society” now — in a situation in which social roles are used to
reproduce social relationships. Would the way that we relate when we are free
of character armor and social roles still be social relationships? I envision
a world in which we can live our lives fully, as unique, wild beings, moving
freely into and out of relations with each other as our desires motivate us,
never creating the sorts of complex structures of formalized relationships
that I understand as “society.” It is only in such a world that I can imagine
feeling at home. But I really don’t know how to go about creating this world.

Many of my friends wouldn’t agree with my perspective on society, but we all
agree that we want to create ways of relating that are radially different from
what the present authoritarian, capitalist society offers. We all seem to be
uncertain about how we can destroy this society and learn to relate freely.
Clearly, we need to examine what we consider our radical practice.

I have written articles and flyers. I have no illusions about the radical
nature of these projects. They perpetuate certain types of alienated social
relationships, and I am fully aware of this: But I write in hopes of inspiring
something beyond the writing. I hope that what is unique in what I write will
touch another unique individual, allowing us to break down the wall of written
words and maybe meet and create projects together. This hasn’t happened often
though — usually, the social relationship of the printed word remains intact.

In the present situation, scamming and theft are ways of survival which are
somewhat radical. They can involve an element of play and adventure lacking in
regular jobs, but they are still basically ways of reproducing ourselves in
this society and so are, in a sense, work. Still in a small way, theft helps
to undermine the commodity, because you are taking something without paying
for it. But the necessity for secrecy limits this element of radical critique.
What is most radical about scamming and theft — as well as squatting, dumpster
diving and gleaning — is that they drastically reduce our need to work and
free our time for more worthwhile pursuits. But in themselves they are
basically just survival tactics.

Vandalism and sabotage are attacks on property and, thus, on society. But, as
most people use them now, they are limited attacks. They are largely just
reactions to specific, particularly offensive acts of authority. The extent of
the critique can be easily muted by its attachment to a particular
issue — recuperating it for society. Still vandalism and sabotage are an
active attack on society which may sometimes effectively fuck up some of the
projects of Capital. But at their best they express only the destructive side
of anarchic rebellion.

All of these activities are worthwhile as part of our rebellion against this
society, but all are limited. None of them take us beyond the context of this
society. Every one of these activities is, at least partially, created by
society as a reaction against it. They don’t free us from society or enhance
what is unique to us. They only place us on the edge of society (which is
certainly the most free and enjoyable place to be in society), and that is not
good enough for those of us who want to live out our lives to the limits.

> “Not at the margins of what is collapsing\
> Not at the margins of what is falling\
> But at the center of what is… rising”

Since we want to create new ways of relating, ways which grow out of our
unique individuality, not social roles, we can’t merely react to
society — making it the center of our activity and ourselves merely its
margins.Each of us needs to make what is unique to us — our own desires,
passions, relations, and experiences — the center of our activity. This
implies a radically different conception of revolution than that of the
various communists and orthodox anarchists who center on “the masses.” Neither
working class, nor common human activity can create the revolution I’m talking
about. The rebellion of the individual against the constraints of society —
against the processes of domestication — is the basis from which the
revolutionary project has to grow. When the acts of rebellion of a number of
individuals coincide and can embrace each other, those individuals can
consciously act together and in this are the seeds of a revolution that can
free each of us as unique, wild, free-spirited individuals. But what does this
mean on a practical level.

Making ourselves the center of our activity means relating to society and
relating to each other in new ways. When we begin to live in terms of our own
desires and experiences, our own passions and relations, we find ourselves
perpetually — if often subliminally — in conflict with society. Since society
depends upon structure and order, and what is unique to us is chaotic and
unpredictable, we have a useful advantage in this struggle. We can study
society, learn something about how it functions and how it protects itself;
but no amount of psychological study can give the force of order knowledge of
our unique individuality. As long as we act from our own uniqueness with our
knowledge of society — avoiding falling into social roles and predictable
patterns — our actions will seem to come from nowhere, yet will wreak havoc on
our enemy. Refusing to play social roles in the expected way, refusing to
pretend that we accept having to pay for things or work for survival, refusing
to follow rules of etiquette and protocol — this is a beginning. Spontaneous
(or seemingly spontaneous) pranks and guerrilla theater — which cannot be
attributed to clowns, theater troupes or other social entities — may expose
the nature of an aspect of society and even create a situation in which the
choice between free life and the mere existence offered by society can no
longer be hidden. Acts of theft, vandalism and sabotage, springing from our
desires rather than being merely a reaction to a particular social atrocity,
will be more random and more frequent. Our violence against society will
strike like lightning, unpredictably and with the intensity of our desire to
live our lives to the full.

But to be able to fight intelligently for ourselves against society requires
knowledge and skills. Society, by placing us into social roles, limits our
knowledge and skills, so we need to share this information. Books and articles
can help us to do this, but are open to public scrutiny — including that of
the authorities. That makes our activity more predictable and us more
vulnerable. So ways of sharing knowledge that grow from our actual relations
as unique individuals need to be created.

This need to share skills coincides with our desire to live life fully, to be
able to freely relate and to enjoy each other as unique, wild beings, making
the exploration of new ways of relating to each other an immediate
necessity — not something to be put off until “after the revolution.” Each of
us is unique and so unpredictable. Having been taught all of our lives to
relate as social roles rather than as the unique beings that we are, we have
to rely on our imaginations to create new ways of relating, not on any
already-tried pattern — and could it be any other way when we don’t want to
create new social roles? So the ideas I am sharing are tentative, calling for
explorations into unknown realms, inviting us to adventures that are to be
entered only to the extent that they fulfill our desires and enhance us as
unique individuals. There is nothing inherently revolutionary about these
explorations. They become revolutionary only in conjunction with a conscious
and active resistance to society — a conscious recognition that our uniqueness
and freedom as individuals is in conflict with society and that we must
destroy it to fully free ourselves.

I’ve thought a lot about how to explore new ways of relating over the past
several years. These explorations would need to be based on the unique desires
of each of the individuals involved and on their mutual trust for each other.
At first my thoughts centered mainly on some sort of settled rural/wilderness
living situation involving non-economized relating, projects of wilderness
expansion and resistance to and sabotage of domestication and authority. The
more I thought about this, the more it seemed that such a project would
involve a compromise of my own real desires — and would most likely recreate
society on a smaller scale with individuals playing social roles rather than
relating on the basis of what they uniquely are.

When people come together on the basis of each of their unique desires and
their trust for each other, their union is, by its nature, very transitory.
Individuals will come and go as they please and participate in the way they
please. This makes a settled living situation, at best, very temporary.
Recently, I have been wandering. I would enjoy sharing this life with friends
and lovers who wish to wander as well. We would be a wandering festival of
rebellion and wonder. I say a festival, and not a tribe or a band, because the
only constant would be the commitment of each individual involved to live
their life to the full and fight against whatever prevents this, the
individuals themselves constantly coming and going as they desire. Survival
activities could include wild harvesting, theft, scams, sharing gifts with
friends and accepting gifts from people who appreciate any street
performance — public expressions of our creative playfulness — we do. We can
share skills and knowledge with friends we visit, creating an informal network
for spreading knowledge and skills among those we trust. Acts of vandalism and
sabotage and other attacks against society will be easier since we will not be
staying around — providing an added aspect of invisibility. In these
wanderings, I would expect to spend a lot of time in wild places. I would want
to explore these places and come to know them well. These wild places would be
good locations to destroy this society. These gatherings would provide another
means of sharing knowledge and skills as well as being a hell of a lot of fun.

As I said above, in and of themselves, these are not revolutionary ideas.
Hobos, freaks, rainbow people and others have often been wanderers, but with
no awareness of the war of society against the free-spirited individual. We
are at war, but we aren’t fighting for power. We don’t need to build armies to
overthrow the powers that be; we need to become wild, free-spirited, unique
individuals whose violence springs from our desire to live life to the limits,
and so can undermine power itself. Wandering festivals of free-spirited
individuals can incorporate this destructive activity — very possibly much
more easily than more organized and readily defined groups.

I’ve already said that these are tentative suggestions, ideas to be tried and
tested. I’m tired of feeling isolated because I refuse to sacrifice myself to
social roles. I want to explore new ways of relating. I’d love to hear other
people’s ideas for exploring ways of relating that get beyond social roles and
enhance what is unique in each of us. But more than that, I want to actively
explore these ideas in practice and share these explorations with friends and
lovers. Then we can cease to be merely on the margins of society and will
each, as unique wild beings, become the center of an insurrectionary project
that may destroy civilization and create a world in which we freely live,
relate and create as our unique desires move us. We will become — to quote
Renzo Novatore again — “a shadow eclipsing any form of society which can exist
under the sun.”

## To Have Done With the Economy Of Love[^11]

> “Love of all things is integral beauty; it has no hate or possessiveness….
> So accept love wherever you may find it: It is difficult to recognize
> because it never asks.”
>
> — Austin Osman Spare

Sexual love, erotic pleasure, is the source of boundless ecstasy, the
expression of the infinite divinity of our bodies. It is the very creative
energy of the cosmos. When this energy flows through us unchecked, we come to
be in love, to desire to share erotic pleasure with the entire cosmos. But
only rarely do we experience this boundless energy. Within the bounds of
commodity culture, love too is a commodity. An economy of love has developed,
and that economy destroys the free flow of pleasure.

The economy of love can only exist because love has been made a scarcity. As
infants, we are wild, divine lovers in love with ourselves and with all other
beings. But parents steal this from us. They deny the sexual nature of their
love for the child and sell expressions of love in exchange for acceptable
behavior. They punish or reprimand us for blatantly sexual behavior, calling
it bad. They judge us and so teach us to judge ourselves. Instead of loving
ourselves, we feel obliged to prove ourselves — and fail often enough to never
feel sure of ourselves. Love ceases to be a free gift to the cosmos and
becomes a very scarce, high-priced commodity for which we must compete.

The competition for economized love changes us. We lose our spontaneity, our
free and playful self-expression. It doesn’t do to act as we truly feel. We
must make ourselves desirable. If we are good-looking by cultural standards,
we have a big advantage, for appearance is a major part of what makes a
desirable sexual commodity. But there are other useful traits — strength,
sexual prowess, “good taste,” intelligence, sparkling wit. And, of course,
knowledge of how to play the social-sexual games. The better actor wins at
these games. Knowing how to put across the right image, knowing just what role
to play in what situation — this will buy you economized love. But at the
expense of losing yourself.

Few people have both physical attractiveness and adeptness at playing the
social-sexual games. So we are left without love except on very rare
occasions. It is no surprise that when these occasions arise we do not let
them flow naturally, but seek to hold on to them, to extend them. When love is
economized, it no longer lends itself to free relating, because the flowing
away of a particular lover has come to mean the end of love itself. Instead of
relating freely, we seek to build relationships — making relating permanent,
hardening it into a system of exchange in which lovers continue to sell love
to each other until, at some point, one of them feels cheated or finds an
economic relationship because of the fear of losing love — and having to go
through the whole process of earning love all over again.

And relationships — being an expression of economized love — are usually
supposed to be monogamous. We do not want to lose our lover to another. If we
do not agree to only sell our love to each other, might not our lover find a
better product, a lover they prefer to us, and leave us? And so the fears
induced by the scarcity of love help to create institutions that reinforce
that scarcity.

Some people don’t choose the way of relationships. They want to prove
themselves to be truly desirable commodities. So they become sexual
conquistadors. They want to rack up a high score in the arena of sexual
conquest. They don’t care about sharing pleasure. They just want to create an
image. And those who fuck them do it for the status as well. For these people,
the ecstasy of total sharing has been lost completely to the economy of love.
It is the score and only the score that counts. In order to make the
commodities more valuable, the economy of love has created sexual
specialization. Of course, the cultural emphasis on masculinity or femininity
over our natural androgyny is the foremost aspect of this. But the labels of
sexual preference, when made permanent self-definitions, are also a part of
this. By defining ourselves as gay or straight or bisexual, as child lover or
fetishist or any other limited form, rather than letting our desires flow
freely, we are making a specialized product of ourselves and so reinforcing
the scarcity of love.

When love becomes a commodity it ceases to be real love, for Eros cannot be
chained. Love must flow freely and easily without price and without
expectations. When love is economized, it ceases to exist, because the lovers
cease to exist. Since we must become desirable products, we repress our real
selves in order to take on the roles which our culture teaches us will make us
desirable. So it is mask kissing mask, image caressing image — but no real
lovers to be found anywhere.

If we are to experience the infinite energy of sexual love, the wild divinity
of our bodies in ecstasy, then we must free ourselves of the economy of love.
We have to throw off every aspect of this lifeless shell that our culture
passes off as love. For nowhere in its realms can the wild joys of boundless
pleasure be experienced.

But to break free of the economy of love, love must cease to be a scarcity for
us. While the wild cosmos abounds with lovers, commodity culture has stolen
this from us. So we are left with one way to free ourselves of love’s
scarcity. We need to learn to love ourselves, to find ourselves such a source
of pleasure that we fall in love with ourselves. After all, is not my body the
source of the pleasure I feel in love? Are not my flesh, my nerves, my
tingling skin the vast galaxies in which this boundless energy flows? When we
learn to be in love with ourselves, to find ourselves a source of endless
erotic pleasure, love can never be scarce for us, for we will always have
ourselves as a lover.

And when we love ourselves, the boundless joy of Eros will flow through us
spilling freely forth. We will not grasp for love because of need, but we will
freely share our vast erotic energy with every being who opens to it. Our
lovers will be men and women, children, trees and flowers, non-human animals,
mountains, rivers, oceans, stars and galaxies. Our lovers will be everywhere,
for we ourselves are love.

As mighty gods of love, we then can roam the earth as outlaw heroes, for
having escaped the economy of love, we have the strength to oppose all
economy. And we will not tolerate this culture where our lovers are abused,
enslaved and threatened, murdered and imprisoned. With all the mighty energy
of love, we will break every chain and storm the walls until they fall and
every one we love is free. And so will end the long, nightmarish rule of
economy, the death-dance of civilization.

## The Cybernet of Domination[^12]

*(Author’s note: This article is more speculative than I ideally would have
liked, because it is attempting to trace the tendencies inherent in one aspect
of modern society, tendencies which, of course, are in relationship to other
aspects of this society. This should not be read as prediction, but as an
attempt to show why cybernetics is not even potentially liberating and will
ultimately be opposed by insurgent free spirits.)*

> “The dictatorship of the instrument is the worst kind of dictatorship.”
>
> — Alfredo M. Bonanno

There is a revolution going on. By this I do not mean an insurrection, an
uprising of individuals against authority (though this revolution has managed
to recuperate some anti-authoritarian tendencies towards its ends). I mean a
substantial, qualitative change in the modes of social reproduction. The
domination of industrial capital over these processes is being replaced by the
domination of cybernetic capital. As with all such revolutions, this will not
be a smooth, easy, peaceful transition. The old ruling order and the new
ruling order are in conflict. The strength of reactionary elements in American
politics over the past several years shows the tenacity with which the old
order is trying to maintain its dominance. But increasingly that dominance is
purely political, and the cybernetic new order dominates the economy. Some of
my technophilic anarchist friends have told me that I “need to face up to the
realities of the cybernetic age.” To me, this means examining the nature of
domination in the cybernetic age and relentlessly attacking. All that I’ve
observed indicates that cybernetic science and technology are essential
aspects of this domination.

Cybernetics innovators tend to be young (as compared to most of the political
leaders of the “old order”) and consider themselves rebels of sorts, at the
cutting edge. The anarcho-technophiles I have met are quite sincerely
rebellious and consider themselves to be opposing all authority. But most of
the cybernetic rebellion — including a fair amount of the ‘anarchist’
cybernetic rebellion — seems like a rebellion of entrepreneurs, a rebellion to
liberate a mode of production/reproduction not to liberate individuals. Since
these cybernetic innovators are the human agents of a qualitative change in
the nature of capitalism, it is no surprise that they choose to play a role
similar to that of earlier capitalist revolutionaries. Most of the cybernetics
freaks I know are too poor and too sincerely anarchic to ever become part of a
new ruling class. But cybernetic innovators with money are creating just such
a ruling class — though, as I will attempt to show below, this ‘class’ might
more accurately be perceived as a system of relationships in which the
technology itself rules and the human “ruling class” of cybertechnicians and
scientists only serves the instrument, the machine. The rebellion of the
cybernetic innovators is, from its birth, purely a coup d’etat. There is
nothing truly liberating about it.

As banal as it is, it seems to need constant repeating: we live in a society
in which the image dominates reality, in which most people see the image as
reality. This makes it very easy for the cybernetic order to recuperate
rebellion, because this new order not only has a far better grasp of
image-making technologies than does the old order; increasingly, it is
becoming those technologies. A comparison of the old order — which still is
the main source of domination in most of our lives — and the new order — which
is perfecting the tools of domination, but at the expense of the old order —
would be worthwhile here.

The old order is that of industrial/financial capital. But it is more than
this — it is also the order of the nation-state and of real political power.
Authority is blatantly centralized and openly hierarchical — no one else can
pretend they are not being ruled. This is blatant because essential power in
this order actually resides in human beings in their roles as part of the
social structure. The political mode of this order is representational
democracy or one of its variants, such as fascism, socialist dictatorship and
other forms of dictatorship. The domination of civilization over all
non-human-made existence is openly accepted as a positive and necessary thing.
Commands and voting on a choice between various commands are the methods for
getting things done. Punishment is the way of dealing with aberrations from
the social norms (though even the old order frequently uses the language of
therapy to describe its punishments). In other words, the old order is quite
open about its authoritarian nature.

At present, in much of the world (quite noticeably in the U.S.), the
technology of the new order is still mostly controlled by the old order, which
is incapable of using it efficiently, because it can’t be understood in the
old order’s terms. The social potential of cybernetics is, thus, best
discovered by reading and listening to the cyber-mavericks. If their visions
were pure sci-fi fantasies, I’d ignore them, but the socio-political
structures to fit their visions are being actively promoted and created by
various quasi-libertarian ‘radical’ groups and individuals (e.g. the Greens,
libertarian municipalists, social ecologists, Robert Anton Wilson, Timothy
Leary…).

In the new order, the dominant form of capital is cybernetic/informational
capital. This does not mean the end of industrial, financial and mercantile
capitalism, but rather their subjection to the cybernetic mode of social
reproduction. This new mode allows for some changes in social structures that,
on the surface, appear almost anarchic — changes such as those promoted by
Murray Bookchin, the Greens, RA. Wilson and other libertarians of the left and
right. These changes are not only possible, but are probably necessary to some
extent for the efficient reproduction of cybernetic society. Decentralization
is a major rallying cry of many cybernetic radicals. This apparently anarchic
goal is, in fact, not the least bit anti-authoritarian in the context of
cybernetic capitalism. Cybernetic technology not only allows, but promotes, a
decentralization of authority. Industrial capitalism began the process by
which authority would come to exist increasingly in the very physical
machinery which reproduces society. Cybernetic technology is perfecting this
process to the extent of even bringing technologies of social control into the
realms of leisure — the home computer, video games and the like. All of these
apparently individual bits of cybertech-which have permeated workplaces,
schools, game arcades and, at least in the U.S., homes of nearly anyone who’s
not too poor to get a personal computer — are part of a potentially unified,
global network. This network is becoming the center of authority and power. It
includes both the material technology of cybernetic machines and the social
technology of cybernetic systemic structures. Those who are too poor to buy
the material machinery are encompassed in the network by its making them
dependent on social programs that are part of the network — this dependence
stemming from a lack of access they have to knowledge which would allow them
to create their lives for themselves. The decentralization offered by
cybernetics can even extend to industry, fitting in well with the visions of
certain techno-anarchists. Some corporations are already experimenting with
having some of their production done in the form of cottage industry. What
can’t be done this way could probably be so automated that only a few
technicians would be needed in a factory as trouble-shooters. (I’ve seen a
huge factory which seemed to have only four workers.) So cybernetics allows
for the apparent decentralization of production. But, of course, production
itself remains unquestioned. This is because cybernetic ‘decentralization’ is
not the least bit anti-authoritarian; it merely centers authority in a
socio-technological network that has no spatial or material center, because
the network is itself the center and it is (almost) everywhere. And it can
easily intrude into all of our lives.

Along with apparent decentralization, cybernetic technology offers the
possibility of apparent ‘direct’ democracy. This is what seems to attract
those anarchists and libertarian leftists who drool over this technology.
Everyone who ‘owns’ a computer is, at least politically, connected to everyone
else who ‘owns’ a computer. It would be no surprise if some form of personal
computer becomes available to even the poorer people in the more advanced
areas of capitalist domination since this would more fully integrate them into
the cybernet. If everyone in a particular nation had a computer, they could be
easily convinced that they could make the real decisions that effect their
lives — that they could vote ‘directly’ through their computers on all
significant issues. That this constitutes as complete a separation between
decision and action as may be possible is conveniently forgotten, as is the
fact that the cybernetic system itself cannot be questioned significantly in
this way since this system itself controls what can and cannot be questioned
by the very nature of its technology. Cybernetic language is a high-tech
newspeak. The ‘direct’ democracy it offers is only that which can reproduce
cybernetic society. It does not eliminate representation; it can merely center
it in technology rather than in elected human beings. But like all
representations, this technology will act as a ruler.

The ideology behind cybernetic technology is systems analysis. Systems
analysis seeks to understand all interactions in terms of systems or networks
of relationships in which each thing affects all other things. It attempts to
scientifically (i.e. mathematically) understand these systems of relationships
in order to better control them. Thus, the concept of ‘process’, as opposed to
chains of command, becomes increasingly important in cybernetic society.
‘Process’ — a radical buzzword for “politically correct” ways of communicating
and relating — fits in very well with systems analysis because it is an
attempt to formalize decision making relationships without making anyone
involved feel that they are being coerced. ‘Correct’ process is potentially,
the way for the cybernet to integrate everyone as completely as possible into
itself. Process militates against non-participation, tending to make
non-participation appear as victimization rather than as a freely made choice.
The ideology behind ‘correct’ process assumes that the individual is merely a
part of the process of the system of relationships that is the group (on the
micro-level) or. society (on the macro-level). Process is systems analysis
applied to group and social projects. It is the domination of the ideology of
the cybernet in our interactions. Process is used regularly mostly in radical,
ecological, feminist and similar groups. But many corporations are integrating
process — consensus, facilitation and the like — with old order chains of
command in experiments designed to make employees feel that they are more
truly part of the corporation. Ultimately, the ‘process’ created by
predominantly middle class ‘radical’ groups provides a system for controlling
rebellious tendencies which fits perfectly into the framework of cybernetic
control.

If a part of the cybernetic process is not functioning correctly, you don’t
punish it; you try to fix it. In the context of cybernetic society, punishment
of criminals and deviants comes to appear increasingly inhuman and absurd.
Efficient social control requires everyone to be as fully integrated into the
social system as possible, and punishment does nothing to integrate the
punished — more often than not it does the opposite. So the most ‘progressive’
elements in society create therapeutic approaches for dealing with social
deviance. At present, criminals are still mostly punished though the language
of therapy is used even in this context. Non-criminal deviance (e.g.
‘excessive’ alcohol use, ‘inappropriate’ sexual behavior, acting up in school,
‘madness’) tends to be labeled a disease and ‘treated’. The proliferation of
12-step groups and new-age therapies is just a part of this phenomenon. Many
of these groups very blatantly teach that you cannot do anything about your
alleged problems by yourself; you have to become part of an interdependent
group of fellow victims, helping each other to recover — forever and ever and
ever — and become productive members of society. Occasionally, even criminals
— particularly people convicted of DUI or minor drug offenses — are given a
choice between punishment or forced therapy. A therapeutic approach to social
deviance appears very humane — enough so that many anarchists have integrated
aspects of therapeutic ideology into their perspectives-but this is deceptive.
The purpose of thcrapy is to reintegrate social deviants into the social
machine as well-oiled cogs. It defines technology or the conception of the
wilds as integrated systems to be used in an integrated manner by society.
Even “deep ecologists” only reject the integration of civilized social systems
and wild ‘eco-systems’, because they feel that civilized social systems have
strayed too far from the ‘natural’ systems to be capable of integrating
(making some sort of social apocalypse inevitable), not because they reject
the idea that undomesticated relating and interaction can be systematized.
While most corporations continue on apace destroying the environment, it is
quite hip now to talk ecology, and the most progressive corporations even try
to act ecologically. After all, it is to their ultimate benefit. How can you
possibly expand capital if you destroy the resources necessary for such
expansion? So cybernetic capitalism tends toward an ecological practice as a
means of domesticating the wilds without destroying them, of integrating them
into the social system of the cybernet.

Of course, these are all just tendencies which the development and increasing
power of cybernetic capital seem to be pushing towards. The old order of
industrial capital is still quite strong, dominating in the political arena,
and so still quite significant as a mode of social domination. But an
intelligent insurgency needs to understand domination in its totality, needs
to be able to recognize its new faces, so that insurgents aren’t duped into
embracing a new form of domination as liberation. Most of the individuals I
know who have embraced some version of ecotopian, cybernetic, green anarchism
seem to be quite sincere in their desire to live free of all constraints. But
they seem to ignore some very basic aspects of cybernetics. As science,
cybernetics is the study of systems of control. Practically, it is the
production of such systems, technologically and socially — the production of
integrated systems of social control. Some of the most common words of
cybernetic language make this obvious. ‘Data’ comes from a Greek word which
means ‘That which is given” — that is an axiom, that which you are told,
without proof, and are simply not to question. Information originally meant,
literally “in formation” in Latin. The cybernet offers no liberation
whatsoever, merely the illusion of liberation to keep rebels “in formation.”
It undermines individual experience and the trust of individuals in their own
experience by creating realms of pseudo-experience, that is, of “the given,”
of information which has no connection to anything outside the cybernet.
Individuals, increasingly, rely only on what they are told by the cybernet,
and so become dependent upon cybernetic society. In this way, the cybernet
becomes the most truly totalitarian system yet — precisely by ‘decentralizing’
and using the integrative methods of process and therapy which make
individuals the agents of their own domestication in a situation in which no
one trusts themselves, but all are dependent on the cybernet.

There is one flaw in this system. It disenfranchises those who do not want or
cannot afford to have cybernetic technology in their home. Even when home
computers do become available to the very poor, many may have no interest in
even learning how to use them. It is further quite doubtful that the fully
enfranchised — the technicians and scientists who know how to produce and
fully use these technologies — will be interested in bringing everyone up to
their level of knowledge about the cybernet. So, the disenfranchised —
especially the voluntarily disenfranchised — will tend to become increasingly
more so, until they are nearly completely outside the cybernet. While inside
the cybernet the tendency is toward total control, — outside the cybernet the
tendency would be toward the total breakdown of social control. Ultimately, in
such a situation; insurgent rebellion would only be possible outside the net.

At present, this situation is being forestalled as the new cybernetic order
and the old order have an uneasy truce. The old order needs the informational
technologies which create and are created by the new order. And the new order
is not yet powerful enough to dispense with some of the harsher means of
social control produced by the old order. The new order has also found ways of
integrating some of the more progressive elements of the old order, such as
multinational organizations, into itself. It is also quite possible that the
cybernet will find continued uses for cops, prisons and the like within its
systemic network of social control. Or the uneasy truce may go on,
indefinitely. Since the real relations between people do not, in fact, fit the
formulas of the cybernet and its systems analysts, there is no way of
predicting what might happen. My own desire is for an insurrection that will
blow all systems of social control to bits.

But cybernetic technology is becoming the dominant mode of post-industrial
capital. It is a mode in which capital, technology, authority and society
become so totally integrated that they are truly one. Rebellion, in this
context, means rebellion against the cybernet and rebellion against society in
its totality or it means nothing. This is what it means for the insurgent to
face up to the reality of cybernetic technology. The insurgent individual can
no longer do anything less than rebel against the totality of society —
including all of those ‘radical’ perspectives which are nothing more than the
cutting edge of the real “new world order.”

## The Ideology of Victimization[^13]

In New Orleans, just outside the French Quarter, there’s a bit of stenciled
graffiti on a fence that reads: “Men Rape.” I used to pass by this nearly
every day. The first time I saw this, it pissed me off because I knew the
graffitist would define me as a ‘man’ and I have never desired to rape anyone.
Nor have any of my bepenised friends. But, as I encounter this spray-painted
dogma every day, the reasons for my anger changed. I recognized this dogma as
a litany for the feminist version of the ideology of victimization — an
ideology which promotes fear, individual weakness (and subsequently dependence
on ideologically based support groups and paternalistic protection from the
authorities) and a blindness to all realities and interpretations of
experience that do not conform to one’s view of oneself as a victim.

I don’t deny that there is some reality behind the ideology of victimization.
No ideology could work if it had no basis whatsoever in reality. As Bob Black
has said, “We are all adult children of parents.” We have all spent our entire
lives in a society which is based on the repression and exploitation of our
desires, our passions, and our individuality, but it is surely absurd to
embrace defeat by defining ourselves in terms of our victimization.

As a means of social control, social institutions reinforce the feeling of
victimization in each of us while focusing these feelings in directions that
reinforce dependence on social institutions. The media bombards us with tales
of crime, political and corporate corruption, racial and gender strife,
scarcity and war. While these tales often have a basis in reality, they are
presented quite clearly to reinforce fear. But many of us doubt the media, and
so are served up a whole slew of ‘radical’ ideologies — all containing a grain
of real perception, but all blind to whatever does not fit into their
ideological structure. Each one of these ideologies reinforces the ideology of
victimization and focuses the energy of individuals away from an examination
of society in its totality and of their role in reproducing it. Both the media
and all versions of ideological radicalism reinforce the idea that we are
victimized by that which is ‘outside’, by the Other, and that social
structures — the family, the cops, the law, therapy and support groups,
education, ‘radical’ organizations or anything else that can reinforce a sense
of dependence — are there to protect us. If society did not produce these
mechanisms — including the structures of false, ideological, partial
opposition — to protect itself, we might just examine society in its totality
and come to recognize its dependence upon our activity to reproduce it. Then,
every chance we get, we might refuse our roles as dependent/victim of society.
But the emotions, attitudes, and modes of thought evoked by the ideology of
victimization make such a reversal of perspective very difficult.

In accepting the ideology of victimization in any form, we choose to live in
fear. The person who painted the “Men Rape” graffiti was most likely a
feminist, a woman who saw her act as a radical defiance of patriarchal
oppression. But such proclamations, in fact, merely add to a climate of fear
that already exists. Instead of giving women, as individuals a feeling of
strength, it reinforces the idea that women are essentially victims, and women
who read this graffiti, even if they consciously reject the dogma behind it,
probably walk the streets more fearfully. The ideology of victimization that
permeates so much feminist discourse can also be found in some form in gay
liberation, racial/national liberation, class war and damn near every other
‘radical’ ideology. Fear of an actual, immediate, readily identified threat to
an individual can motivate intelligent action to eradicate the threat, but the
fear created by the ideology of victimization is a fear of forces both too
large and too abstract for the individual to deal with. It ends up becoming a
climate of fear, suspicion and paranoia which makes the mediations which are
the network of social control seem necessary and even good.

It is this seemingly overwhelming climate of fear that creates the sense of
weakness, the sense of essential victimhood, in individuals. While it is true
that various ideological “liberationists” often bluster with militant rage, it
rarely gets beyond to that point of really threatening anything. Instead, they
‘demand’ (read “militantly beg”) that those they define as their oppressors
grant them their ‘liberation’. An example of this occurred at the 1989
“Without Borders” anarchist gathering in San Francisco. There is no question
that at most workshops I went to, men tended to talk more than women. But no
one was stopping women from speaking, and I didn’t notice any lack of respect
being show for women who did speak. Yet, at the public microphone in the
courtyard of the building where the gathering was held, a speech was made in
which it proclaimed that ‘men’ were dominating the discussions and keeping
‘women’ from speaking. The orator ‘demanded’ (again, read “militantly begged”)
that men make sure that they gave women space to speak. In other words, to
grant the ‘rights’ of the oppressed — an attitude which, by implication,
accepts the role of man as oppressor and woman as victim. There were workshops
where certain individuals did dominate the discussions, but a person who is
acting from the strength of their individuality will deal with such a
situation by immediately confronting it as it occurs and will deal with the
people involved as individuals. The need to put such situations into an
ideological context and to rent the individuals involved as social roles,
turning the real, immediate experience into abstract categories is a sign that
one has chosen to be weak, to be a victim. And embracing weakness puts one in
the absurd position of having to beg one’s oppressor to grant one’s
liberation — guaranteeing that one will never be free to be anything but a
victim.

Like all ideologies, the varieties of the ideology of victimization are forms
of fake consciousness. Accepting the social role of victim — in whatever one
of its many forms — is choosing to not even create one’s life for oneself or
to explore one’s real relationships to the social structures. All of the
partial liberation movements — feminism, gay liberation, racial liberation,
workers movements and so on — define individuals in terms of their social
roles. Because of this, these movements not only do not include a reversal of
perspectives which breaks down social roles and allows individuals to create a
praxis built on their own passions and desires; they actually work against
such a reversal of perspective. The ‘liberation’ of a social role to which the
individual remains subject. But the essence of these social roles within the
framework of these ‘liberation’ ideologies is victimhood. So the litanies of
wrongs suffered must be sung over and over to guarantee the ‘victims’ never
forget that is what they are. These ‘radical’ liberation movements help to
guarantee that the climate of fear never disappears, and that individuals
continue to see themselves weak and to see their strength as lying in the
social roles which are, in fact, the source of their victimization. In this
way, these movements and ideologies act to prevent the possibility of a potent
revolt against all authority and all social roles.

True revolt is never safe. Those who choose to define themselves in terms of
their role as a victim do not dare to try total revolt, because it would
threaten the safety of their roles. But, as Nietzsche said: “The secret of the
greatest fruitfulness and the greatest enjoyment of existence is to live
dangerously!” Only a conscious rejection of the ideology of victimization, a
refusal to live in fear and weakness, and an acceptance of the strength of our
own passions and desires, of ourselves as individuals who are greater than,
and so capable of living beyond, all social roles, can provide a basis for
total rebellion against society. Such a rebellion is certainly fueled, in
part, by rage, but not the strident, resentful, frustrated rage of the victim
which motivates feminists, racial liberationists, gay liberationists and the
like to ‘demand’ their ‘rights’ from the authorities. Rather it is the rage of
our desires unchained, the return of the repressed in full force and
undisguised. But more essentially, total revolt is fueled by a spirit of free
play and of joy in adventure — by a desire to explore every possibility for
intense life which society tries to deny us. For all of us who want to live
fully and without constraint, the time is past when we can tolerate living
like shy mice inside the walls. Every form of the ideology of victimization
moves us to live as shy mice. Instead, let’s be crazed & laughing monsters,
joyfully tearing down the walls of society and creating lives of wonder and
amazement for ourselves.

## Nature as spectacle. The image of wilderness vs. wildness[^14]

*(Author’s note: The frequent use of quotation marks in this essay is to
reinforce the idea that nature and wilderness are concepts, not actual
beings.)*

Nature has not always existed. It is not found in the depths of the forest, in
the heart of the cougar or in the songs of the pygmies; it is found in the
philosophies and image constructions of civilized human beings. Seemingly
contradictory strands are woven together creating nature as an ideological
construct that serves to domesticate us, to suppress and channel our
expressions of wildness.

Civilization is monolithic and the civilized way of conceiving everything that
is observed is also monolithic. When confronted with the myriad of beings all
around, the civilized mind needs to categorize in order to feel that it is
understanding (though, in fact, all it is understanding is how to make things
useful to civilization). Nature is one of the most essential of civilized
categories, one of the most useful in containing the wildness of human
individuals and enforcing their self-identification as civilized, social
beings.

Probably the earliest conception of nature was something similar to that found
in the old testament of the Bible: the evil wilderness, a place of desolation
inhabited by ferocious and poisonous beasts, malicious demons and the mad.
This conception served a purpose especially important to early civilizations.
It induced fear of what was wild, keeping most people in the city walls and
giving those who did go out to explore a defensive posture, an attitude that
they were in enemy territory. This concept, in this way, helped create the
dichotomy between “human” and “nature” that keeps individuals from living
wildly, that is, in terms of their desires.

But a totally negative conception of nature was bound to reach its limits of
usefulness since it made civilization into an enclosed and besieged fortress,
and to survive civilization has to expand, to be able to exploit more and
more. “Nature” became a basket of resources for civilization, a “mother” to
nurture “humanity” and its civilization. It was beautiful, worthy of worship,
contemplation, study… and exploitation. It was not evil… but it was chaotic,
capricious and unreliable. Fortunately for civilization, “human nature” had
evolved, rational and needing to order things, to bring them under control.
Wild places were necessary so that people could study and contemplate “nature”
in its untouched state, but precisely so that civilized human beings could
come to understand and control “natural” processes in order to use them to
expand civilization. So the “evil wilderness” is overshadowed by a “nature” or
“wilderness” that has positive value for civilization.

The concept of nature creates systems of social value and morality. Because of
the apparently contradictory strands that have gone into the development of
“nature,” these systems also may appear contradictory; but they all achieve
the same end: our domestication. Those who tell us to “act civilized” and
those who tell us to “act natural” are really telling us the same thing: “Live
in accordance with external values, not in accordance with your desires.” The
morality of naturalness has been no less vicious than any other morality.
People have been imprisoned, tortured and even killed for committing
“unnatural acts”- and still are. “Nature,” too, is an ugly and demanding god.

From its beginnings, nature has been an image created by authority to
reinforce its power. It is no surprise that in modern society, where image
dominates reality and often seems to create it, “nature” comes into its own as
a means of keeping us domesticated. “Nature” shows on TV, Sierra Club
calendars, “wilderness” outfitters, “natural” foods and fibers, the
“environmental” president and “radical” ecology all conspire to create
“nature” and, our “proper” relationship to it. The image evoked retains
aspects of the “evil wilderness” of early civilization in a subliminal form.
“Nature” shows always include scenes of predation and the directors of these
shows have been said to use electric prods in attempts to goad animals into
fights. The warnings given to would-be “wilderness” explorers about dangerous
animals and plants and the amount of products created by “wilderness”
outfitters for dealing with these things is quite excessive from my own
experiences wandering in wild places. We are given the image of life outside
of civilization as a struggle for survival.

But the society of the spectacle needs the “evil wilderness” to be subliminal
in order to use it efficiently. The dominant image of “nature” is that it is a
resource and a thing of beauty to be contemplated and studied. “Wilderness” is
a place to which we can retreat for a short time, if properly outfitted, to
escape from the humdrum of daily life, to relax and meditate or to find
excitement and adventure. And, of course, “nature” remains the “mother” who
supplies our needs, the resource from which civilization creates itself.

In commodity culture, “nature” recuperates the desire for wild adventure, for
life free from domestication, by selling us its image. The subliminal concept
of the “evil wilderness” gives venturing into the woods a tang of risk that
appeals to the adventurous and rebellious. It also reinforces the idea that we
don’t really belong there, thus selling us the numerous products deemed
necessary for incursions into wild places. The positive concept of nature
makes us feel that we must experience wild places (not realizing that the
concepts we’ve had fed into us will create what we experience at least as much
as our actual surroundings). In this way, civilization successfully
recuperates even those areas it seems not to touch directly, transforming them
into “nature,” into “wilderness,” into aspects of the spectacle which keep us
domesticated.

“Nature” domesticates because it transforms wildness into a monolithic entity,
a huge realm separate from civilization. Expressions of wildness in the midst
of civilization are labelled as immaturity, madness, delinquency, crime or
immorality, allowing them to be dismissed, locked away, censured or punished
while still maintaining that what is “natural” is good. When “wildness”
becomes a realm outside of us rather than an expression of our own individual
free-spiritedness, then there can be experts in “wildness” who will teach us
the “correct” ways of “connecting” with it. On the west coast, there are all
sorts of spiritual teachers making a mint selling a “wildness” to yuppies
which in no way threatens their corporate dreams, their Porsches or their
condos. “Wilderness” is a very profitable industry these days.

Ecologists — even “radical” ecologists — play right into this. Rather than
trying to go wild and destroy civilization with the energy of their unchained
desires, they try to “save wilderness.” In practice, this means begging or
trying to manipulate the authorities into stopping the more harmful activities
of certain industries and turning pockets of relatively undamaged woods,
deserts and mountains into protected “Wilderness Areas.” This only reinforces
the concept of wildness as a monolithic entity, “wilderness” or “nature,” and
the commodification inherent in this concept. The very basis of the concept of
a “Wilderness Area” is the separation of “wildness” and “humanity.” So it is
no surprise that one of the brands of “radical” ecological ideology has
created the conflict between “biocentrism” and “anthropocentrism” — as though
we should be anything other than egocentric.

Even those “radical ecologists” who claim to want to reintegrate people into
“nature” are fooling themselves. Their vision of (as one of them put it) a
“wild, symbiotic whole” is just the monolithic concept created by civilization
worded in a quasi-mystical way. “Wildness” continues to be a monolithic entity
for these ecological mystics, a being greater than us, a god to whom we must
submit. But submission is domestication. Submission is what keeps civilization
going. The name of the ideology which enforces submission matters little — let
it be “nature,” let it be the “wild, symbiotic whole.” The result will still
be the continuation of domestication.

When wilderness is seen as having nothing to do with any monolithic concept,
including “nature” or “wilderness,” when it is seen as the potential free
spiritedness in individuals that could manifest at any moment, only then does
it become a threat to civilization. Any of us could spend years in “the
wilderness,” but if we continued to see what surrounded us through the lens of
civilization, if we continued to see the myriads of beings monolithically as
“nature,” as “wilderness,” as the “wild, symbiotic whole,” we’d still be
civilized; we would not be wild. But if, in the midst of the city, we at any
moment actively refuse our domestication, refuse to be dominated by the social
roles that are forced upon us and instead live in terms of our passions,
desires and whims, if we become the unique and unpredictable beings that lie
hidden beneath the roles, we are, for that moment, wild. Playing fiercely
among the ruins of a decaying civilization (but don’t be fooled, even in decay
it is a dangerous enemy and capable of staggering on for a long time), we can
do our damnedest to bring it tumbling down. And free-spirited rebels will
reject the survivalism of ecology as just another attempt by civilization to
suppress free life, and will strive to live the chaotic, ever-changing dance
of freely relating, unique individuals in opposition both to civilization and
to civilization’s attempt to contain wild, free-spirited living: “Nature.”

## The Cops In Our Heads: Some thoughts on anarchy and morality[^15]

In my travels over the past several months, I have talked with many anarchists
who conceive of anarchy as a moral principle. Some go so far as to speak of
anarchy as though it were a deity to whom they had given
themselves — reinforcing my feeling that those who really want to experience
anarchy may need to divorce themselves from anarchism.

The most frequent of the moral conceptions of anarchy I heard defined anarchy
as a principled refusal to use force to impose one’s will on others. This
conception has implications which I cannot accept. It implies that domination
is mainly a matter of personal moral decisions rather than of social roles and
relationships, that all of us are equally in a position to exercise domination
and that we need to exercise self-discipline to prevent ourselves from doing
so. If domination is a matter of social roles and social relationships, this
moral principle is utterly absurd, being nothing more than a way of separating
the politically correct (the elect) from the politically incorrect (the
damned). This definition of anarchy places anarchic rebels in a position of
even greater weakness in an already lopsided struggle against authority. All
forms of violence against people or property, general strikes, theft and even
such tame activities as civil disobedience constitute a use of force to impose
one’s will. To refuse to use force to impose one’s will is to become totally
passive — to become a slave. This conception of anarchy makes it a rule to
control our lives, and that is an oxymoron.

The attempt to make a moral principle of anarchy distorts its real
significance. Anarchy describes a particular type of situation, one in which
either authority does not exist or its power to control is negated. Such a
situation guarantees nothing — not even the continued existence of that
situation, but it does open up the possibility for each of us to start
creating our lives for ourselves in terms of our own desires and passions
rather than in terms of social roles and the demands of social order. Anarchy
is not the goal of revolution; it is the situation which makes the only type
of revolution that interests me possible — an uprising of individuals to
create their lives for themselves and destroy what stands in their way. It is
a situation free of any moral implications, presenting to each of us the
amoral challenge to live our lives without constraints.

Since the anarchic situation is amoral, the idea of an anarchist morality is
highly suspect. Morality is a system of principles defining what constitutes
right and wrong behavior. It implies some absolute outside of individuals by
which they are to define themselves, a commonality of all people that makes
certain principles applicable to everyone.

I don’t wish to deal with the concept of the “commonality of all people” in
this article: My present point is that whatever morality is based upon, it
always stands outside of and above the living individual. Whether the basis or
morality is god, patriotism, common humanity, production needs, natural law,
“the Earth,” anarchy, or even “the individual” as a principle, it is always an
abstract ideal that rules over US” Morality is a form of authority and will be
undermined by an anarchic situation as much as any other authority if that
situation is to last.

Morality and judgment go hand in hand. Criticism — even harsh, cruel
criticism — is essential to honing our rebellious analysis and practice, but
judgment needs to be utterly eradicated. Judgment categorizes people as guilty
or not guilty — and guilt is one of the most powerful weapons of repression.
When we judge and condemn ourselves or anyone else, we are suppressing
rebellion — that is the purpose of guilt. (This does not mean that we
“shouldn’t” hate, or wish to kill anyone — it would be absurd to create an
“amoral” morality, but our hatred needs to be recognized as a personal passion
and not defined in moral terms.) Radical critique grows from the real
experiences, activities, passions and desires of individuals and aims at
liberating rebelliousness. Judgment springs from principles and ideals that
stand above us; it aims at enslaving us to those ideals. Where anarchic
situations have arisen, judgment has often temporarily disappeared, freeing
people of guilt — as in certain riots where people of all sorts looted together
in a spirit of joy in spite of having been taught all of their lives to
respect property. Morality requires guilt; freedom requires the elimination of
guilt.

A dadaist once said, “Being governed by morals… has made it impossible for us
to be anything other than passive toward the policeman; this is the source of
our slavery.” Certainly, morality is a source of passivity. I have heard of
several situations in which fairly large-scale anarchic situations started to
develop and have experienced minor ones, but in each of these situations, the
energy dissipated and most participants returned to the non-lives they’d lived
before the uprisings. These events show that, in spite of the extent to which
social control permeates all of our waking (and much of our sleeping) lives,
we can break out. But the cops in our heads — the morality, guilt and fear —
have to be dealt with. Every moral system, no matter what claims it makes to
the contrary, places limits on the possibilities available to us, constraints
upon our desires; and these limits are not based on our actual capabilities,
but on abstract ideas that keep us from exploring the full extent of our
capabilities. When anarchic situations have arisen in the past, the cops in
peoples’ heads — the ingrained fear, morality and guilt — have frightened
people, keeping them tame enough to retreat back into the safety of their
cages, and the anarchic situation disappeared.

This is significant because anarchic situations don’t just pop out of
nowhere — they spring from the activities of people frustrated with their
lives. It is possible for each of us at any moment to create such a situation.
Often this would be tactically foolish, but the possibility is there. Yet we
all seem to wait patiently for anarchic situations to drop from the sky — and
when they do explode forth, we can’t keep them going. Even those of us who
have consciously rejected morality find ourselves hesitating, stopping to
examine each action, fearing the cops even when there are no external cops
around. Morality, guilt and fear of condemnation act as cops in our heads,
destroying our spontaneity, our wildness, our ability to live our lives to the
full.

The cops in our heads will continue to suppress our rebelliousness until we
learn to take risks. I don’t mean that we have to be stupid — jail is not an
anarchic or liberatory situation, but without risk, there is no adventure, no
life. Self-motivated activity — activity that springs from our passions and
desires, not from attempts to conform to certain principles and ideals or to
blend in to any group (including “anarchists”) — is what can create a
situation of anarchy, what can open up a world of possibilities limited only
by our capabilities. To learn to freely express our passions — a skill earned
only by doing it — is essential. When we feel disgust, anger, joy, desire,
sadness, love, hatred, we need to express them. It isn’t easy. More often than
not, I find myself falling into the appropriate social role in situations
where I want to express something different. I’ll go into a store feeling
disgust for the whole process of economic relationships, and yet politely
thank the clerk for putting me through just that process. Were I doing this
consciously, as a cover for shoplifting; it would be fun, using my wits to get
what I want; but it is an ingrained social response — a cop in my head. I am
improving; but I have a hell of a long way to go. Increasingly, I try to act
on my whims, my spontaneous urges without caring about what others think of
me. This is a self-motivated activity — the activity that springs from our
passions and desires, from our suppressed imaginations, our unique creativity.
Sure, following our subjectivity this way, living our lives for ourselves, can
lead us to make mistakes, but never mistakes comparable to the mistake of
accepting the zombie existence that obedience to authority, morality, rules or
higher powers creates. Life without risks, without the possibility of
mistakes, is no life at all. Only by taking the risk of defying all authority
and living for ourselves will we ever live life to the full.

I want no constraints on my life; I want the opening of all possibilities so
that I can create my life for myself — at every moment. This means breaking
down all social roles and destroying all morality. When an anarchist or any
other radical starts preaching their moral principles at me — whether
non-coercion, deep ecology, communism, militantism or even
ideologically-required “pleasure” — I hear a cop or a priest, and I have no
desire to deal with people as cops or priests, except to defy them. I am
struggling to create a situation in which I can live freely, being all that I
desire to be, in a world of free individuals with whom I can relate in terms
of our desires without constraints. I have enough cops in my head — as well as
those out on the streets — to deal with without having to deal with the cops
of “anarchist” or radical morality as well. Anarchy and morality are opposed
to each other, and any effective opposition to authority will need to oppose
morality and eradicate the cops in our heads.

## Social transformation — or the abolition of society[^16]

> “Society…
>
> 1.  a group of persons who have the same customs, beliefs, etc. or live
>     under a common government and who are thought of as forming a single
>     community…
> 2.  all people, when thought of as forming a community in which each person
>     is partly dependent on all the rest”
>
> — Webster’s New World Dictionary

Nothing we “know” can be assumed to be true — none of our conceptions of the
world are sacred and we would do well to question them all. Many anarchists
talk about creating a “new” or “free” society. But few question the idea of
society itself. The conception of society is amorphous — and so more difficult
to deal with than particular aspects of it like government, religion,
capitalism or technology. It is so ingrained in us that questioning it feels
like questioning our very nature — which makes it all the more necessary to
question it. Freeing ourselves from the character armor that represses our
desires and passions may very well demand, not merely the transformation of
society, but its abolition. The dictionary definitions above show society to
be a single entity made up of individuals who are in a condition of (at least
potential) dependency upon each other — which is to say, who are not complete
in themselves. I see society as a system of relationships between beings who
are acting (or being treated) as social roles in order to reproduce the system
and themselves as social individuals.

The dependency of social individuals is not the same as the biological
dependency of infants. Biological dependency ends once the child achieves
adequate mobility and hand-and-eye coordination (in about five years). But in
those five years, the social relationships of the family repress children’s
desires, instill fear of the world into them and so submerge the potential for
full, free, creative individuality beneath the layers of armoring which are
the social individual, beneath the psychic dependency which makes us cling
desperately to each other while we despise each other. All social
relationships have their basis in the incompleteness produced by the
repression of our passions and desires. Their basis is our need for each
other, not our desire for each other. We are using each other. So every social
relationship is an employer/employee relationship, which is why they seem
always, to one extent or another, to become adversarial — whether through
joking put-downs, bickering or full-fledged fighting. How can we help but
despise those we use and hate those who use us?

Society cannot exist apart from social roles — this is why the family and
education in some form are essential parts of society. The social individual
doesn’t play only one social role — but melds together many roles which create
the character armor which is mistaken for “individuality.”

Social roles are ways in which individuals are defined by the whole system of
relationships that is society in order to reproduce society. They make
individuals useful to society by making them predictable, by defining their
activities in terms of the needs of society. Social roles are work — in the
broad sense of activity that reproduces the production/consumption cycle.
Society is thus the domestication of human beings — the transformation of
potentially creative, playful, wild beings who can relate freely in terms of
their desires into deformed beings using each other to try to meet desperate
needs, but succeeding only at reproducing the need and the system of
relationships based on it.

> “A pox on all captivity, even should it be in the interest of the universal
> good, even in Montezuma’s garden of precious stones.”
>
> — Andre Breton

Free-spirited individuals have no interest in seriously relating as social
roles. Predictable, predetermined relationships bore us and we have no desire
to continue to reproduce them. It is true that they offer some security,
stability and (luke-)warmth… but at such expense! Rather, we want freedom to
relate in terms of our unrepressed desires, the opening of all possibilities,
the raging fire of our passions unbound. And such a life lies outside any
system of predictable, predetermined relationships.

Society offers safety, but it does so by eradicating the risk that is
essential to free play and adventure. It offers us survival — in exchange for
our lives. For the survival it offers us is survival as social individuals —
as beings who are composites of social roles, alienated from their passions
and desires — involved in social relationships to which we are addicted, but
which never satisfy.

A world of free relating among unrepressed individuals would be a world free
of society. All interactions would be determined immediately. All by the
individuals involved, in terms of their desires — not by the necessities of a
social system. We would tend to amaze, delight, enrage each other, to evoke
real passion rather than mere boredom, complacency, disgust, or security.
Every encounter would have a potential for marvelous adventure which cannot
fully exist where most relating is in the form of social relationships. So
rather than remain captive in this “garden of precious stones” called society,
I choose to struggle to abolish society — and that has several implications as
to how I understand “revolution” (for want of a better term).

The struggle to transform society is always a struggle for power, because its
goal is to gain control over the system of relationships that is society (a
goal which I see as unrealistic since this system is now mostly beyond
anyone’s control). As such, it cannot be an individual struggle. It requires
mass or class activity. Individuals have to define themselves as social beings
in this struggle, suppressing any individual desires which do not fit in to
the. “greater” goal of social transformation.

The struggle to abolish society is a struggle to abolish power. It is
essentially the struggle of individuals to live free of social roles and
rules, to live out their desires passionately, to live out all the most
marvelous things they can imagine. Group projects and struggles are part of
this, but they grow from the ways in which the desires of the individuals can
enhance each other, and will dissolve when they begin to stifle the
individuals. The path of this struggle cannot be mapped out because its basis
is the confrontation between the desires of the free-spirited individual and
the demands of society. But analyses of the ways in which society molds us and
of the failures and successes of past rebellions are possible.

The tactics used against society are as many as the individuals involved, but
all share the aim of undermining social control and conditioning, and freeing
the individual’s desires and passions. The unpredictability of humor and
playfulness are essential, evoking a Dionysian chaos. Playing with social
roles in ways that undermine their usefulness to society, that turn them on
their head, making toys of them is a worthy practice. But most importantly,
let us confront society with ourselves, with our unique desires and passions,
with the attitude that we are not going to give in to it, or center our
activities around it, but are going to live on our own terms.

Society is not a neutral force. Social relationships only exist by the
suppression of the real desires and passions of individuals, by the repression
of all that makes free relating possible. Society is domestication, the
transformation of individuals into use value and of free play into work. Free
relating among individuals who refuse and resist their domestication
undermines all society, and opens all possibilities. And to those who feel
that they can achieve freedom through a merely social revolution, lend with
these words of Renzo Navatore:

> “You are waiting for the revolution? Let it be! My own began a long time
> ago! When you will be ready… I won’t mind going along with you for a while.
> But when you’ll stop, I shall continue on my insane and triumphant way
> toward the great and sublime conquest of the nothing!”

[^1]: From *Willfull Disobedience* \#2

[^2]: From *Willfull Disobedience* \#2

[^3]: From *Willfull Disobedience* \#2

[^4]: From *Demolition Derby* \#1, 1988, p. 30.

[^5]: First published in *Live Wild or Die* \#1 February 1988, reprinted in
    *Anarchy: A Journal Of Desire Armed* \#19, May-July 1989.

[^6]: From *Anarchy: A Journal Of Desire Armed* \#42, Fall 1995

[^7]: From *The Iconoclast’s Hammer* column in *Anarchy: A Journal Of Desire
    Armed* \#36, Spring 1993

[^8]: From the pamphlet, “Rants, Essays and Polemics of Feral Faun” (Chaotic
    Endeavors, 1987) reprinted in *Green Anarchy* \#10 (Fall 2002)

[^9]: From *Anarchy: A Journal Of Desire Armed* \#40, Spring-Summer 1994.
    Republished by Elephant Editions (London) 2000/2001 in the collection
    *Feral Revolution*, reprinted in the pamphlet *The Quest for the
    Spiritual* by Venomous Butterfly Publications.

[^10]: From *Anarchy: A Journal Of Desire Armed* \#22, November–December 1989

[^11]: From *Anarchy: A Journal Of Desire Armed* Double Issue \#20/21
    August–October 1989.

[^12]: From *Anarchy: A Journal Of Desire Armed* Issue \#35, Winter 1993

[^13]: First appeared in *Anarchy: A Journal Of Desire Armed* issue \#32,
    Spring 1992, and again in *Anarchy* issue \#55 Spring/Summer 2003.
    Republished by Elephant Editions (London) 2000/2001 in the collection
    *Feral Revolution*. Reprinted in the pamphlet *The Iconoclast’s Hammer* by
    Venomous Butterfly Publications.

[^14]: From *Anarchy: A Journal Of Desire Armed* Issue \#29 Summer 1991.
    Republished by Elephant Editions (London) 2000/2001 in the collection
    *Feral Revolution*.

[^15]: From *Anarchy: A Journal Of Desire Armed* \#24, March-April 1990.
    Republished by Elephant Editions (London) 2000/2001 in the collection
    *Feral Revolution*. Reprinted in the pamphlet *The Quest for the
    Spiritual* by Venomous Butterfly Publications.

[^16]: From *Anarchy: A Journal Of Desire Armed* Issue \#25 Summer 1990,
    Republished by Elephant Editions (London) 2000/2001 in the collection
    *Feral Revolution*. Reprinted in the pamphlet *The Iconoclast’s Hammer* by
    Venomous Butterfly Publications.
