% The Wandering of Humanity
% Jacques Camatte
% 1973

## Original Black & Red Introduction

The essays included in the present work first appeared in the journal
*Invariance* (Année 6, Série II No. 3, 1973) with the titles, “Errance de
l’humanité; Conscience repressive; Communisme,” and “Declin du mode de
production capitaliste ou declin de l’humanité?” The author of these essays,
Jacques Camatte, worked with Amadeo Bordiga and the group of Marxist
theoreticians who were known as the Italian communist left. After the events
which took place in France in May of 1968, Camatte, together with his comrades
on *Invariance*, began a critical analysis of the activities of the Italian
communist left, the work of Bordiga as well as the work of Marx. The title of
the journal originally referred to “the invariance of the theory of the
proletariat,” the theory of the League of Communists and the First
International. By 1973 critics said of this journal that “nothing varies more
than *Invariance*.” Camatte and his comrades, pursuing the critical analysis
they had begun, were led to conclude that “what is invariant is the aspiration
to rediscover the lost human community, and this cannot take place through a
reestablishment of the past, but only through new creation.” Their theoretical
quest led them to a complete rejection of the theory of revolutionary parties
and organizations, the theory of revolutionary consciousness, the theory of
the progressive development of productive forces. “The French May movement
showed that what is needed is a new mode of living, a new life.” (The above
quotations are from the last article in *Invariance* No. 3, 1973.)

(…) The essays in the present work were translated from French by Fredy
Perlman with assistance from Camatte; the illustrations were selected and
prepared by Allan Foster; Lorraine Perlman and Judy Campbell participated in
the photography, printing and binding. (…)

# I. Repressive Consciousness — Communism

## 1. Despotism of Capital

When capital achieves real domination over society, it becomes a material
community, overcoming value and the law of value, which survive only as
something “overcome.” Capital accomplishes this in two ways: 1) the quantity
of labor included in the product-capital diminishes enormously
(devalorization); 2) the exchange relation tends increasingly to disappear,
first from the wage relation, then from all economic transactions. Capital,
which originally depended on the wage relation, becomes a despot. When there
is value it is assigned by capital.

Capital is capital in process. It acquired this attribute with the rise of
fictive capital, when the opposition valorization/devalorization still had
meaning, when capital had not yet really overcome the law of value.

Capital in process is capital in constant movement; it capitalizes everything,
assimilates everything and makes it its own substance. Having become
autonomous, it is “reified form” in movement. It becomes intangible. It
revitalizes its being — that vast metabolism which absorbs ancient exchanges
or reduces them to exchanges of a biological type — by despoiling all human
beings in their varied activities, however fragmented these may be (this is
why capital pushes human beings to engage in the most diverse activities). It
is humanity that is exploited. More than ever the expression “exploitation of
man by man” becomes repulsive.

In its perfected state, capital is representation. Its rise to this state is
due to its anthropomorphization, namely to its capitalization of human
beings,[^1] and to its supersession of the old general equivalent, gold.
Capital needs an ideal representation, since a representation with substance
inhibits its process. Gold, if it is not totally demonetized, can no longer
play the role of standard. Capitalized human activity becomes the standard of
capital, until even this dependence on value and its law begin to disappear
completely. This presupposes the integration of human beings in the process of
capital and the integration of capital in the minds of human beings.

Capital becomes representation through the following historical movement:
exchange value becomes autonomous, human beings are expropriated, human
activity is reduced to labor, and labor is reduced to abstract labor. This
takes place when capital rises on the foundation of the law of value. Capital
becomes autonomous by domesticating the human being. After
analyzing-dissecting-fragmenting the human being, capital reconstructs the
human being as a function of its process. The rupture of the body from the
mind made possible the transformation of the mind into a computer which can be
programmed by the laws of capital. Precisely because of their mental
capacities, human beings are not only enslaved, but turned into willing slaves
of capital. What seems like the greatest paradox is that capital itself
reintroduces subjectivity, which had been eliminated at the time of the rise
of exchange value. All human activity is exploited by capital. We can rephrase
Marx’s statement, “Labor, by adding a new value to the old one, at the same
time maintains and eternizes [capital]” [^2] to say: all human activity
“eternizes” capital.

Capital as representation overcomes the old contradiction between monopoly and
competition. Every quantum of capital tends to become a totality; competition
operates between the various capitals, each of which tends to become the
totality. Production and circulation are unified; the ancient opposition
between use value and exchange value loses its *raison d’être*. Besides,
consumption is the utilization of not only material products but mostly
representations that increasingly structure human beings as beings of capital
and revitalize capital as the general representation. Prices no longer have
the function they had in the period of formal domination of capital, when they
were representations of value; they become mere indices or signs of
representations of capital. Free goods are not impossible. Capital could
assign a specific quantity of its products to each programmed individual; this
quantity might depend on the required activity imposed on this individual.
Such a despotism would be more powerful than the present one. Human beings
would wish they had the money which had “given” them free access to the
diversity of products.

During its development capital always tended to negate classes. This has
finally been accomplished through the universalization of wage labor and the
formation — as a transitional stage — of what is called the universal class, a
mere collection of proletarianized men and women, a collection of slaves of
capital. Capital achieved complete domination by mystifying the demands of the
classical proletariat, by dominating the proletarian as productive laborer.
But by achieving domination through the mediation of labor, capital brought
about the disappearance of classes, since the capitalist as a person was
simultaneously eliminated.[^3] The State becomes society when the wage
relation is transformed into a relation of constraint, into a statist
relation. At the same time the State becomes an enterprise or racket which
mediates between the different gangs of capital.

Bourgeois society has been destroyed and we have the despotism of capital.
Class conflicts are replaced by struggles between the gangs-organizations
which are the varied modes of being of capital. As a result of the domination
of representation, all organizations which want to oppose capital are engulfed
by it; they are consumed by phagocytes.

It is the real end of democracy. One can no longer hold that there is a class
which **represents** future humanity, and *a fortiori* there is no party, no
group; there can be no delegation of power.

Advertising crassly reflects the fact that capital is representation, that it
survives because it is representation in the mind of each human being
(internalizing what was externalized). Advertising is the discourse of
capital:[^4] everything is possible, all norms have disappeared. Advertising
organizes the subversion of the present for the sake of an apparently
different future.

“We now face the problem of letting the average American feel moral when he
flirts, when he spends, even when he buys a second or third car. One of the
basic problems of this prosperity is to give people sanction and justification
to enjoy it, to show them that making their lives a pleasure is moral and not
immoral. This permission given to the consumer to freely enjoy life, this
demonstration that he has a right to surround himself with products that
enrich his existence and give him pleasure, should be one of the main themes
of all advertising and of every project designed to increase sales.”[^5]

The disintegration of consciousness which can be seen in manifestations like
the women’s liberation movement, the gay liberation movement and
anti-psychiatry (which are only possible after the work of Freud, Reich, and
the feminist movement at the beginning of this century) is not part of the
simultaneous emergence of revolutionary consciousness, but only reflects the
end of bourgeois society based on value, on a fixed standard which affected
all levels of human life. The disintegration began when the general equivalent
conflicted with circulation. If the former general equivalent gave way, it was
lost. The State had to force all subjects to respect a normalcy based on a
standard which established the values of society. The law of value imprisoned
human beings, forcing them into stereotypes, into fixed modes of being. The
highest development of morality appeared in Kant’s categorical imperative. By
engulfing the general equivalent, by becoming its own representation, capital
removed the prohibitions and rigid schemas. At that point human beings are
fixed to its movement, which can take off from the normal or abnormal, moral
or immoral human being.

The finite, limited human being, the individual of bourgeois society, is
disappearing. People are passionately calling for the liberated human being, a
being who is at once a social being and a *Gemeinwesen*. But at present it is
capital that is recomposing man, giving him form and matter; communal being
comes in the form of collective worker, individuality in the form of consumer
of capital. Since capital is indefinite it allows the human being to have
access to a state beyond the finite in an infinite becoming of appropriation
which is never realized, renewing at every instant the illusion of total
blossoming.

The human being in the image of capital ceases to consider any event
definitive, but as an instant in an infinite process. Enjoyment is allowed but
is never possible. Man becomes a sensual and passive voyeur, capital a sensual
and suprasensual being. Human life ceases to be a process and becomes linear.
Aspired by the process of capital, man can no longer be “himself.” This
aspiration evacuates him, creating a vacuum which he must continually satisfy
with representations (capital). More generally, capital in process secures its
domination by making every process linear. Thus it breaks the movement of
nature, and this leads to the destruction of nature. But if this destruction
might endanger its own process, capital adapts itself to nature (by
anti-pollution, for example).

The non-living becomes autonomous — and triumphs. Death in life: Hegel had
intuited it, Nietzsche described it, Rainer Maria Rilke sang about it, Freud
almost institutionalized it (the death instinct), Dada exhibited it as buffoon
art, and the “fascists” exalted it: “Long live death.” The U.S. feminist
movement has individualized it:

“The male likes death — it excites him sexually and, already dead inside, he
wants to die.”[^6]

The autonomy of form affects all aspects of life dominated by capital.
Knowledge is valid only if it is formalized, if it is emptied of content.
Absolute knowledge is tautology realized; it is dead form deployed over all
knowledge. Science is its systematization; epistemology is its redundancy.

In the era of its real domination, capital has run away (as the cyberneticians
put it), it has escaped.[^7] It is no longer controlled by human beings.
(Human beings in the form of proletarians might, at least passively, represent
a barrier to capital.) It is no longer limited by nature. Some production
processes carried out over periods of time lead to clashes with natural
barriers: increase in the number of human beings, destruction of nature,
pollution. But these barriers cannot be theoretically regarded as barriers
which capital cannot supersede. At present there are three possible courses
for the capitalist mode of production (in addition to the destruction of
humanity — a hypothesis that cannot be ignored):

-   complete autonomy of capital: a mechanistic utopia where human beings
    become simple accessories of an automated system, though still retaining
    an executive role;

-   mutation of the human being, or rather a change of the species: production
    of a perfectly programmable being which has lost all the characteristics
    of the species *Homo sapiens*. This would not require an automatized
    system, since this perfect human being would be made to do whatever is
    required;

-   generalized lunacy: in the place of human beings, and on the basis of
    their present limitations, capital realizes everything they desire (normal
    or abnormal), but human beings cannot find themselves and enjoyment
    continually lies in the future. The human being is carried off in the
    run-away of capital, and keeps it going.[^8]

The result is ultimately the same: the evolution of the human being is frozen,
sooner in one case than in another. These possibilities are abstract limits;
in reality they tend to unfold simultaneously and in a contradictory manner.
To continue on its indefinite course, capital is forced to call on the
activity of human beings, to exalt their creativity. And to secure its
permanence, capital has to act quickly. It runs into barriers of time and
space which are linked to the decrease of natural resources (which cannot all
be replaced by synthetic substitutes) and the mad increase of human population
(which causes the disappearance of numerous forms of life).

It becomes clear that raising the banner of labor or its abolition remains on
the terrain of capital, within the framework of its evolution. Even the
movement toward unlimited generalization of desire is isomorphic to the
indefinite movement of capital.

The capitalist mode of production is not decadent and cannot be decadent.
Bourgeois society disintegrated, to be sure, but this did not lead to
communism. At most we can say that communism was affirmed in opposition to
bourgeois society, but not in opposition to capital. The run-away of capital
was not perceived; in fact this run-away was realized only with the rise of
the fascist, Nazi, popular front movements, the New Deal, etc., movements
which are transitions from formal to real domination. It was thought that
communism was emerging from the socialization of human activity and thus from
the destruction of private property, while in fact capital was emerging as a
material community.

## 2. Growth of Productive Forces; Domestication of Human Beings

The capitalist mode of production becomes decadent only with the outbreak of
effective revolution against capital. As of now, human beings have been
decaying for a century, they have been domesticated by capital. This
domestication is the source of the proletariat’s inability to liberate
humanity. Productive forces continue to grow, but these are forces of capital.

> “Capitalist production develops technique and the combination of the social
> production process only by simultaneously using up the two sources from
> which all wealth springs: the land and the laborer.”[^9]

It makes no sense to proclaim that humanity’s productive forces have stopped
growing, that the capitalist mode of production has begun to decay. Such views
reveal the inability of many theoreticians to recognize the run-away of
capital and thus to understand communism and the communist revolution.
Paradoxically, Marx analyzed the decomposition of bourgeois society and the
conditions for the development of the capitalist mode of production: a society
where productive forces could develop freely. What he presented as the project
of communism was realized by capital.

Man elaborated a dialectic of the development of productive forces.[^10] He
held that human emancipation depended on their fullest expansion. Communist
revolution — therefore the end of the capitalist mode of production — was to
take place when this mode of production was no longer “large enough” to
contain the productive forces. But Marx is trapped in an ambiguity. He thinks
that the human being is a barrier to capital, and that capital destroys the
human being as a fetter to its development as productive power. Marx also
suggests that capital can escape from the human barrier. He is led to
postulate a self-negation of capital. This self-negation takes the form of
crises which he perceived either as moments when capital is restructured (a
regeneration carried out by the destruction of products inhibiting the
process: another reason why capitalism must disappear), or as the actual
moment when capital is destroyed.

In other words, while providing the elements necessary for understanding the
real domination of capital over society, Marx did not develop the concept; he
did not recognize the run-away of capital. For Marx, gold remained a barrier
to capital, the contradiction between valorization and devalorization remained
in force, and the plunder and estrangement of proletarians remained an
obstacle to the evolution of capital.

> “In the development of productive forces there comes a stage when productive
> forces and means of intercourse are brought into being, which, under the
> existing relationships, only cause mischief, and are no longer productive
> but destructive forces (machinery and money)…”

(Before continuing the citation, we should mention the retardation of those
who proclaim that capital now develops only destructive forces. It turns out
that for Marx, in 1847, capital is destruction; he continued to hold this
view.)

> “… and connected with this a class is called forth, which has to bear all
> the burdens of society without enjoying its advantages, which, ousted from
> society, is forced into the most decided antagonism to all other classes; a
> class which forms the majority of all members of society, and from which
> emanates the consciousness of the necessity of a fundamental revolution, the
> communist consciousness, which may, of course, arise among the other classes
> too through the contemplation of the situation of this class.”[^11]

The proletariat is the great hope of Marx and of the revolutionaries of his
epoch. This is the class whose struggle for emancipation will liberate all
humanity. Marx’s work is at once an analysis of the capitalist mode of
production and of the proletariat’s role within it. This is why the theory of
value and the theory of the proletariat are connected, though not directly:

> “The above application of the Ricardian theory, that the entire social
> product belongs to the workers as **their** product, because they are the
> sole real producers, leads directly to communism. But, as Marx indicates too
> in the above-quoted passage, formally it is economically incorrect, for it
> is simply an application of morality to economics. According to the laws of
> bourgeois economics, the greatest part of the product does not belong to the
> workers who have produced it. If we now say: that is unjust, that ought not
> to be so, then that has nothing immediately to do with economics. We are
> merely saying that this economic fact is in contradiction to our sense of
> morality. Marx, therefore, never based his communist demands upon this, but
> upon the inevitable collapse of the capitalist mode of production which is
> daily taking place before our eyes to an ever greater degree…”[^12]

Marx did not develop a philosophy of exploitation, as Bordiga often recalled.
How will the capitalist mode of production be destroyed, and what does the
“ruin” consist of? (Engels, in 1884, provided arguments for those who today
speak of the decadence of capitalism.) This is not specified. After Marx the
proletariat was retained as the class necessary for the final destruction, the
definitive abolition of capitalism, and it was taken for granted that the
proletariat would be forced to do this.

Bernstein grasped this aspect of Marx’s theory, and applied himself to
demonstrating that there were no contradictions pushing toward
dissolution.[^13] But this led Bernstein to become an apologist for the old
bourgeois society which capital was about to destroy, especially after 1913;
consequently his work does not in any way clarify the present situation.

Marx left us material with which to overcome the theory of value, and also
material necessary for overcoming the theory of the proletariat. The two
theories are related, and justify each other. In the *Grundrisse*, Marx
praises the capitalist mode of production, which he considers revolutionary.
What is not stated explicitly is that the proletariat has this attribute to
the extent that it carries out the internal laws of capitalism. The
proletariat is present in the analysis. Marx postulates that the proletariat’s
misery will necessarily push it to revolt, to destroy the capitalist mode of
production and thus to liberate whatever is progressive in this mode of
production, namely the tendency to expand productive forces.

In *Capital* the proletariat is no longer treated as the class that represents
the dissolution of society, as negation at work. The class in question here is
the working class, a class which is more or less integrated in society, which
is engaged in revolutionary reformism: struggle for wage increases, struggle
against heavy work imposed on women and children, struggle for the shortening
of the working day.

At the end of the first volume, Marx explains the dynamic which leads to the
expropriation of the expropriators, to the increase of misery[^14] which will
force the proletariat to rise against capital.[^15]

In the third volume, and also in the *Critique of the Gotha Programme*, Marx
does not describe a real discontinuity between capitalism and communism.
Productive forces continue to grow. The discontinuity lies in the fact that
the goal of production is inverted (after the revolution; i.e., the
discontinuity is temporal). The goal ceases to be wealth, but human beings.
However, if there is no real discontinuity between capitalism and communism,
human beings must be wilfully transformed; how else could the goal be
inverted? This is Marx’s revolutionary reformism in its greatest amplitude.
The dictatorship of the proletariat, the transitional phase (in the
*Grundrisse* it is the capitalist mode of production that constitutes this
transitional phase: this is obviously extremely relevant to the way we define
communism today) is a period of reforms, the most important being the
shortening of the working day and use of the labor voucher. What we should
note here, though we cannot insist on it, is the connection between reformism
and dictatorship.

The proletariat seems to be needed to guide the development of productive
forces away from the pole of value toward the pole of humanity. It may happen
that the proletariat is integrated by capital, but — and this is abused by
various Marxists — crises destroy the proletariat’s reserves and reinstate it
into its revolutionary role. Then the insurrection against capital is possible
again.

Thus Marx’s work seems largely to be the authentic consciousness of the
capitalist mode of production. The bourgeoisie, and the capitalists who
followed, were able to express only a false consciousness with the help of
their various theories. Furthermore, the capitalist mode of production has
realized Marx’s proletarian project. By remaining on a narrowly Marxist
terrain, the proletariat and its theoreticians were outflanked by the
followers of capital. Capital, having achieved real domination, ratifies the
validity of Marx’s work in its reduced form (as historical materialism). While
German proletarians at the beginning of this century thought their actions
were destroying the capitalist mode of production, they failed to see they
were only trying to manage it themselves. False consciousness took hold of the
proletariat.

Historical materialism is a glorification of the wandering in which humanity
has been engaged for more than a century: growth of productive forces as the
condition *sine-qua-non* for liberation. But by definition all quantitative
growth takes place in the sphere of the indefinite, the false infinite. Who
will measure the “size” of the productive forces to determine whether or not
the great day has come? For Marx there was a double and contradictory
movement: growth of productive forces and immiseration of proletarians; this
was to lead to a revolutionary collision. Put differently, there was a
contradiction between socialization of production and private appropriation.

The moment when the productive forces were to reach the level required for the
transformation of the mode of production was to be the moment when the crisis
of capitalism began. This crisis was to expose the narrowness of this mode of
production and its inability to hold new productive forces, and thus make
visible the antagonism between the productive forces and the capitalist forms
of production. But capital has run away; it has absorbed crises and it has
successfully provided a social reserve for the proletarians. Many have nothing
left to do but to run on ahead: some say the productive forces are not
developed enough, others say they have stopped growing. Both reduce the whole
problem either to organizing the vanguard, the party, or resort to activities
designed to raise consciousness.

Development in the context of wandering is development in the context of
mystification. Marx considered mystification the result of a reversed
relation: capital, the product of the worker’s activity, appears to be the
creator. The mystification is rooted in real events; it is reality in process
that mystifies. Something is mystified even through a struggle of the
proletariat against capital; the generalized mystification is the triumph of
capital. But if, as a consequence of its anthropomorphization, this reality
produced by mystification is now the sole reality, then the question has to be
put differently. 1) Since the mystification is stable and real, there is no
point in waiting for a demystification which would only expose the truth of
the previous situation. 2) Because of capital’s run-away, the mystification
appears as reality, and thus the mystification is engulfed and rendered
inoperative. We have the despotism of capital.

The assertion that the mystification is still operative would mean that human
beings are able to engage in real relations and are continually mystified. In
fact the mystification was operative once and became reality. It refers to a
historical stage completed in the past. This does not eliminate the importance
of understanding and studying it so as to understand the movement which leads
to the present stage of the capitalist mode of production and to be aware of
the real actors through the ages.

Both the mystifying-mystified reality as well as the previously mystified
reality have to be destroyed. The mystification is only “visible” if one
breaks (without illusions about the limitations of this break) with the
representations of capital. Marx’s work is very important for this break. But
it contains a major flaw: it fails to explain the whole magnitude of the
mystification because it does not recognize the run-away of capital.

Earlier, revolution was possible as soon as the mystification was exposed; the
revolutionary process was its destruction. Today the human being has been
engulfed, not only in the determination of class where he was trapped for
centuries, but as a biological being. It is a totality that has to be
destroyed. Demystification is no longer enough. The revolt of human beings
threatened in the immediacy of their daily lives goes beyond demystification.
The problem is to create other lives. This problem lies simultaneously outside
the ancient discourse of the workers’ movement and its old practice, and
outside the critique which considers this movement a simple ideology (and
considers the human being an ideological precipitate).

## 3. Repressive Consciousness

Mystification does not only affect capitalist society but also affects the
theory of capitalism. Marxist theory elevated to the rank of proletarian
consciousness is a new form of consciousness: repressive consciousness. We
will describe some of its characteristics, leaving aside the problem of
determining whether or not all forms of consciousness throughout history are
repressive.

The object of repressive consciousness is the goal which it thinks it
controls. Since there is a gap between this goal and immediate reality, this
consciousness becomes theological and refines the differences between the
minimum or immediate program and the maximum, future, or mediate program. But
the longer the path to its realization, the more consciousness makes itself
the goal and reifies itself in an organization which comes to incarnate the
goal.

The project of this consciousness is to frame reality with its concept. This
is the source of all the sophisms about the divergence between objective and
subjective elements. It exists but it cannot be. And precisely because of its
inability to be, it has to negate and scorn whatever is trying to emerge, to
be.

In other words, it exists but it needs certain events to be real. Since it is
a product of the past it is refuted by every current event. Thus it can only
exist as a polemic with reality. It refutes everything. It can survive only by
freezing, by becoming increasingly totalitarian. In order to operate it has to
be organized: thus the mystique of the party, of councils, and of other
coagulations of despotic consciousness.

All direct action which does not recognize this consciousness (and every
political racket pretends to embody the true consciousness) is condemned by
it. Condemnation is followed by justification: impatience of those who revolt,
lack of maturity, provocation by the dominant class. The picture is completed
by litanies on the petit-bourgeois character of the eternal anarchists and the
utopianism of intellectuals or young people. Struggles are not real unless
they revive class consciousness; some go so far as to wish for war, so that
this consciousness will at last be produced.

Theory has turned into repressive consciousness. The proletariat has become a
myth, not in terms of its existence, but in terms of its revolutionary role as
the class which was to liberate all humanity and thus resolve all
socio-economic contradictions. In reality it exists in all countries
characterized by the formal domination of capital, where this proletariat
still constitutes the majority of the population; in countries characterized
by the real domination of capital one still finds a large number of men and
women in conditions of 19^th^ century proletarians. But the activity of every
party and every group is organized around the myth. The myth is their source.
Everything begins with the appearance of this class which is defined as the
only revolutionary class in history, or at least as the most revolutionary.
Whatever happened before is ordered as a function of the rise of this class,
and earlier events are secondary in relation to those lived or created by the
proletariat. It even defines conduct. Whoever is proletarian is saved; one who
is not must expiate the defect of non-proletarian birth by various practices,
going so far as to serve terms in factories. A group achieves revolutionary
existence only at the moment when it is able to exhibit one or several
“authentic” proletarians. The presence of the man with calloused hands is the
guarantee, the certificate of revolutionary authenticity. The content of the
program defended by the group, its theory, even its actions, cease to be
important; all that matters is the presence or absence of the “proletarian.”
The myth maintains and revives the antagonism between intellectual and manual.
Many councilists make a cult of anti-intellectualism which serves them as a
substitute for theory and justification. They can pronounce any idiocy;
they’ll be saved; they’re proletarians.

Just as it is thought by many that one who leaves the party thereby ceases to
be revolutionary, so it is considered impossible to be revolutionary without
claiming one’s proletarian position, without taking on the virtues thought to
be proletarian. The counter-revolution ends at the mythical frontiers which
separate the proletariat from the rest of the social body. Any action is
justified in the name of the proletarian movement. One does not act because of
a need to act, because of hatred for capital, but because the proletariat has
to recover its class base. Action and thought are unveiled by intermediaries.

This is how, especially after 1945, the proletariat as revolutionary class
outlived itself: through its myth.

A historical study of proletarian revolutionary movements would shed light on
the limited character of this class. Marx himself clearly exposed its
reformist character. Fundamentally, from 1848, when it demanded the right to
work, to 1917–1923, when it demanded full employment and self-management by
workers’ unions, the proletariat rebelled solely within the interior of the
capitalist system. This seems to conflict with Marx’s statements in his
“Critical Notes on the Article ‘The King of Prussia and Social Reform.’ By a
Prussian”. But at this moment the proletariat really manifested itself as a
class without reserves, as a total negation. It was forced to create a
profound rupture which makes possible an understanding of what communist
revolution and therefore communism can be.[^16] Marx was right; but the
capitalist mode of production, in order to survive, was forced to annihilate
the negation which undermined it. The proletariat which is outside of society,
as Marx and Engels say in *The German Ideology*, is increasingly integrated
into society; it is integrated to the extent that it struggles for survival,
for reinforcement; the more it organizes itself, the more it becomes
reformist. It succeeds, with the German Socialist Party, in forming a
counter-society which is finally absorbed by the society of capital, and the
negating movement of the proletariat is over.[^17]

Didn’t Kautsky, Bernstein and Lenin simply recognize the reality of the
workers’ movement when they declared that it was necessary to unite it with
the socialist movement: “The workers’ movement and socialism are in no way
identical by nature” (Kautsky)?

Doesn’t Lenin’s discredited statement that the proletariat, left to itself,
can only attain trade-union consciousness, describe the truth about the class
bound to capital? It can be criticized only from the standpoint of the
distinction, made by Marx in *The Poverty of Philosophy*, between class as
object of capital and class as subject. Without a revolutionary upheaval the
proletariat cannot become a subject. The process through which it was to
become a subject implied an outside, external consciousness, which at a given
moment would become incarnated in the proletariat. This consciousness coming
from the outside is the most reified, the most estranged form of repressive
consciousness! Consequently, the point is not to rehash the debate and return
to Marx, but to recognize that the cycle of the proletarian class is now over,
first of all because its goals have been realized, secondly because it is no
longer the determinant in the global context. We have reached the end of the
historical cycle during which humanity (especially the part situated in the
West) moved within class societies. Capital has realized the negation of
classes — by means of mystification, since it retains the conflicts and
collisions which characterize the existence of classes. The reality is the
despotism of capital. It is capital we must now face, not the past.

Almost all social democrats were aware of the divorce between the real,
reformist movement of the working class and the socialist goal. Bernstein
proclaimed that it was necessary to adapt once and for all, clearly and
straightforwardly, not hypocritically (like the majority of the socialists) by
making revolutionary proclamations in order to hide compromises.[^18] At the
same time, it became increasingly problematic to define and delimit the
proletarian class. This problem became so acute that by the beginning of this
century almost all revolutionaries were trying to define the proletariat in
terms of consciousness: Luxemburg, Pannekoek directly, Lenin, Trotsky
indirectly through the party, etc. The Russian revolution merely increased the
urgency of specifying the proletarian class; this is the context of Korsch’s
attempts, and especially of Lukacs’ *History and Class Consciousness*. Later
on Bordiga held that the class should be defined in terms of the mode of
production which it builds. Thus it can be a class for itself only from the
moment when its actions move toward this goal, only to the extent that it
recognizes its program (which describes this mode of production). For Bordiga,
it exists when the party exists, because the program can only be carried by
the party. “We still need an object, the party, to envision the communist
society.”[^19] But to the extent that men and women are able to move on their
own toward communism, as is evident among young people today, it becomes
obvious that this object, the party, is not needed.

In sum, for party as well as council advocates, the problem of action would
largely be reduced to finding a direct or indirect means for making the
proletariat receptive to its own consciousness — since in this view the
proletariat is itself only through its consciousness of itself.

## 4. Communism

Revolutionary reformism — the project of creating socialism on the foundation
of capitalism and in continuity with the capitalist mode of production —
disintegrated between 1913 and 1945. It is the end of what turned out to be an
illusion: the illusion of being able to direct the development of the
productive forces in a direction which differed from the one they had taken in
reality. We can actually agree with Marx’s view that after 1848 communism was
possible precisely because the irruption of the capitalist mode of production
had broken all social and natural barriers and made free development possible.
But the mentality, the representations of people were such that they could
neither concieve nor perceive such a future. They were too dependent on the
millenarian movement of value, or they were too debilitated by the limitations
of the perverted remains of their ancient communities, to be able to set out
on a new path to reach another community. Even Marx and Engels ultimately
considered capitalism a necessary moment, and thought that all human beings
everywhere would inevitably come to experience it. Only the revolts of the
Russian populists, and their desire to avoid the capitalist road, made Marx
understand his error. But this recognition was insufficient. From the middle
of the 19^th^ century, with the justification provided by Marxist theory (the
theory of the proletariat), all humanity set out to wander: to develop
productive forces.

If we can no longer accept Marx’s theoretical analysis of the role of the
productive forces, we can nevertheless agree with him after a detour. Capital
enslaves humanity in the very name of humanity because it is
anthropomorphized. This is nothing other than the reign of death. Human beings
are dominated by their past being, while they contemplate it. It is a process
which continually starts over again. Capital penetrates thought,
consciousness, and thus destroys human beings such as they have been produced
by centuries of class society. Their loss of substance is the loss of their
former being, which capital has pumped out of them. Since this process is
almost over, capital is now turning from its attack against the past dimension
of humanity to an attack against its future dimension: it must now conquer
imagination. The human being is thus despoiled and tends to be reduced to the
biological dimension. The phenomenon reaches the roots. In other words, the
development of productive forces appears to have been necessary for the
destruction of old schemas, modes of thought, archaic representations which
limited human beings (this destruction is now being analyzed by philosophers
like Foucault). Threatened in their purely biological existence, human beings
are beginning to rise against capital. It is at this point that everything can
be re-conquered by generalized creation. But this becoming is not simple,
unilinear. Capital can still profit from the creativity of human beings,
regenerating and resubstantializing itself by plundering their imaginations.
The importance and profundity of the struggle can be grasped in the face of
the alternative: communism or destruction of the human species. And it should
not be forgotten that during the wandering various revolutionary movements
looked for an exit and various possibilities were blocked; they can now
manifest themselves.[^20]

We have to stop wandering and destroy the repressive consciousness which
inhibits the emergence of communism. To do this we have to stop perceiving
communism as a prolongation of the capitalist mode of production, and stop
thinking it is enough to suppress exchange value and make use value
triumphant. This dichotomy no longer signifies anything. Use value is tied to
value even if it revolves around the principle of utility instead of
productivity; related to the direct domination of human beings, it is
inseparable from private property.

Communism is not a new mode of production[^21] ; it is the affirmation of a
new community. It is a question of being, of life, if only because there is a
fundamental displacement: from generated activity to the living being who
produced it. Until now men and women have been alienated by this production.
They will not gain mastery over production, but will create new relations
among themselves which will determine an entirely different activity.

Nor is communism a new society.[^22] Society grows out of the subjugation of
some ethnic groups by others, or out of the formation of classes. Society is
the network of social relations which quickly become despotic intermediaries.
Man in society is man enslaved by society.

Communism puts an end to castes, classes and the division of labor (onto which
was grafted the movement of value which in turn animates and exalts this
division). Communism is first of all union. It is not domination of nature but
reconciliation, and thus regeneration of nature: human beings no longer treat
nature simply as an object for their development, as a useful thing, but as a
subject (not in the philosophic sense) not separate from them if only because
nature is in them. The naturalization of man and the humanization of nature
(Marx) are realized; the dialectic of subject and object ends.

What follows is the destruction of urbanization and the formation of a
multitude of communities distributed over the earth. This implies the
suppression of monoculture, another form of division of labor, and a complete
transformation of the transportation system: transportation will diminish
considerably. Only a communal (communitarian) mode of life can allow the human
being to rule his reproduction, to limit the (at present mad) growth of
population without resorting to despicable practices (such as destroying men
and women).

The domination of one group over another, the society of classes, originates
in the sedentarization of the human being. We still live with the myths
generated at the time of this fixation somewhere in our mother-earth: myths of
the homeland, the foreigner; myths which limit the vision of the world, which
mutilate. It is obvious that the reaction cannot be a return to a nomadism of
a type practiced by our distant ancestors who were gatherers. Men and women
will acquire a new mode of being beyond nomadism and sedentarism. Sedentary
lives compounded by corporeal inactivity are the root cause of almost all the
somatic and psychological illnesses of present-day human beings. An active and
unfixed life will cure all these problems without medicine or psychiatry.

The passage to communism implies a transformation of technique. Technology is
not a neutral thing; it is determined by the mode of production. In the West,
more than elsewhere, the various modes of production increasingly separated
human beings from technology, which was originally no more than a modality of
human being. The call for a convenient technology is a call for a technology
which is again a prolongation of the human being and not an autonomous thing
at the service of an oppressive being.[^23]

Human beings in communism cannot be defined as simple users; this would be
communism conceived as a terestrial paradise where people dispose of what
there is with such immediacy that human beings are indistinguishable from
nature (man, as Hegel said in this context, would be an animal). Human beings
are creators, producers, users. The entire process is reconstituted at a
higher level, and for every individual. In relations between individuals, the
other is no longer considered in terms of utility; behavior in terms of
utility ends. The sexes are reconciled while retaining their differences; they
lose the differences and rigid oppositions produced by millenia of antagonism.

These few characteristics should adequately clarify how the movement of ascent
to the human community can be conceived.

We are all slaves of capital. Liberation begins with the refusal to perceive
oneself in terms of the categories of capital, namely as proletarian, as
member of the new middle class, as capitalist, etc. Thus we also stop
perceiving the other — in his movement toward liberation — in terms of those
same categories. At this point the movement of recognition of human beings can
begin. This is obviously only the beginning of the liberation movement, and is
continually threatened with failure. Refusing to take this into account denies
the power of capital. What has to be perceived is a dynamic. We are slaves;
our goal is not to become masters, even without slaves, but to abolish the
entire dialectic of master and slave. This goal cannot be realized by the
establishment of communities which, always isolated, are never an obstacle to
capital, can easily be surrounded by capital, and are no more than deviations
in relation to its norm (deviations which make that norm visible for what it
is). Nor can the goal be reached by the cultivation of one’s individual being,
in which one would finally find the real human being. In reality these
approaches should be connected. Perceiving oneself as a human being unshackled
by any attributes already removes the dog collar imposed by class society. The
desire for community is absolutely necessary. The reaffirmation of
individuality (especially in its temporal aspect) is a rejection of
domestication. But this is inadequate even as a first element of rebellion;
the human being is an individuality and a *Gemeinwesen*. The reduction of the
human being to his present inexpressive state could take place only because of
the removal of *Gemeinwesen*, of the possibility for each individual to absorb
the universal, to embrace the entirety of human relations within the entirety
of time. The varied religions, philosophies and theories are mere substitutes
for this essential component of human being. Since communism is the death of
sameness, of repetition, human beings will emerge in all their diversity;
*Gemeinwesen* will be affirmed by each. This implies that as of now we reject
the despotism of a religion, a philosophy, a theory.

The refusal to be trapped by a theory is not a rejection of all theoretical
reflection. It is just the opposite. But this refusal does postulate that the
theoretical act is insufficient. Theory can call for the reconciliation of
senses and brain but it remains within the boundaries of this separation. What
must be affirmed is the whole of life, the entirety of its manifestations, the
whole unified being. It may still be necessary to proceed with the help of
Marx’s insights, for example, but it becomes increasingly imbecile to proclaim
oneself a Marxist. Furthermore, like repressive consciousness, theory can
become a simple alibi for inaction. At the start, the refusal to act might be
perfectly justifiable. Nevertheless, separation from reality often leads to
failure to perceive new phenomena which shape it. At that point theory,
instead of helping establish contact with reality, becomes an agent of
separation, of removal, and in the end is transformed into a protrusion, an
ejection from the world. Waiting is particularly difficult for those who do
not want to recognize that others can arrive at theory without us, our group,
or our party as intermediaries. Theory, like consciousness, demands
objectification to such an extent that even an individual who rejects
political rackets can elevate theory to the status of a racket. In a subject
posing as revolutionary, theory is a despotism: everyone should recognize
this.

After the domination of the body by the mind for more than two millenia, it is
obvious that theory is still a manifestation of this domination.

It is the whole of life that becomes determining. All the varied productions
of the past — art, philosophy, science — are fragments. They are elements of
the vast despoliation of human beings as well as attempts to remedy it. But
the point is no longer to realize art or philosophy; capital has already done
this in its way; the point is to conquer and create another world: a world
where all the biological potentialities of the species can finally develop. In
this vast movement, it is futile to want to present oneself as the repository
of truth. First of all truth, like value, needs a measure, a standard, a
general equivalent, a norm, hence a **State**. Secondly, truth is never more
than one truth. The historical inflation of this concept parallels the ever
more thorough destruction of human beings. Nothing less can be proposed than
another life where the gestures, the words, the imaginations and all the
feelings of human beings will no longer be chained, where senses and brain
will unite — only this union can eliminate all the fixations of madness. It is
obvious that all this can only be conquered by the destruction of the
capitalist mode of production. It is all of humanity perceived through time
that is hostile to capital. Human beings will have to undergo a profound
revolutionization to be able to oppose capital; the actions of this movement
are accompanied by the production of revolutionaries.

The emergence of revolution in all the domains of our lives leads some people
to overemphasize the places where they felt this emergence.

Revolution does not emerge from one or another part of our being — from body,
space or time. Our revolution as a project to reestablish community was
necessary from the moment when ancient communities were destroyed. The
reduction of communist revolution to an uprising which was to resolve the
contradictions posed by the capitalist mode of production was pernicious.
Revolution has to resolve all the old contradictions created by the class
societies absorbed by capital, all the contradictions between relatively
primitive communities and the movement of exchange value currently being
absorbed by the movement of capital (in Asia and especially in Africa). Beyond
this, the revolutionary movement is the revolution of nature, accession to
thought, and mastery of being with the possibility of using the prefrontal
centers of the brain which are thought to relate to the imagination.
Revolution has a biological and therefore cosmic dimension, considering our
universe limited (to the solar system); cosmic also in the meaning of the
ancient philosophers and mystics. This means that revolution is not only the
object of the passion of our epoch, but also that of millions of human beings,
starting with our ancient ancestors who rebelled against the movement of
exchange value which they saw as a fatality, passing through Marx and Bordiga
who, in their dimension as prophets, witnessed this inextinguishable passion
to found a new community, a human community. Wanting to situate the revolution
is like wanting to fix its height. Saint-Just said that revolution could not
stop until happiness was realized, thus showing the falsity of wanting to
judge men in terms of the purely historical-material facts of a given epoch.
The human being is never a pure being-there. He can only be by superseding and
he cannot be only that which has to be superseded (Nietzsche). Structurally
and biologically man is a supersession because he is an overpowerful being. In
other words, human beings are explorers of the possible and are not content
with the immediately realizable, especially if it is imposed on them. They
lose this passion, this thirst for creation — for what is the search for the
possible if not invention? — when they are debased, estranged, cut off from
their *Gemeinwesen* and therefore mutilated, reduced to simple individuals. It
is only with the real domination of the capitalist mode of production that the
human being is completely evacuated.

All the revolutions of the species are revolutions which try to go beyond the
present moment, beyond what is permitted by the development of productive
forces (Bordiga). This reach beyond the possible is what constitutes the
continuity among the human generations, just as the perspective of communism
conceived as the destruction of classes, exchange, and value constitutes the
continuity among the varied revolutionaries; this is what, following Marx, we
call the historical party.[^24]

The struggle against reduction of the amplitude of the revolution is already a
revolutionary struggle. The reader should not be astonished if to support this
amplitude we refer to authors classically tagged religious, mystical, etc.
What matters is the reappropriation of *Gemeinwesen* (and past beings are part
of it), which can only be done after the unification of the species, and this
unification can only be conceived by grasping the aspiration, desire, passion
and will for community expressed through the ages. The human being can
simultaneously be a *Gemeinwesen* only if humanity lives in community. As soon
as fragmentation appears, the need to recompose a unity emerges. In the West
this unity had a mediate and coercive form: the individual was defined by the
State; knowledge was a means for hierarchization and for justification of the
established order; the vicious circle of practice-theory emerged.

Communist revolution is complete revolution. Biological, sexual, social,
economic revolutions are no more than partial attributes; the predominance of
one is a mutilation of revolution, which can only be by being all.

Communist revolution can be conceived only if it is grasped through the
history and paleontology of human beings as well as all other living beings.
By grasping this we become aware that, if this revolution has long been
necessary, it can now be realized. Earlier it was possible but not
unavoidable. There were still other “human” paths in that they still allowed a
human development; specifically, they allowed the externalization of human
powers. Now almost everything has been externalized and plundered by capital,
which describes the only path other than communist revolution: the total
negation of human beings. Therefore we must understand our world; we must
understand the despotism of capital and the movement of rebellion breaking out
against it. This act of understanding which is taking place not only
intellectually but also sensually (the rebellion is to a large extent bodily
rebellion) can only be reached by rejecting the wandering and the repressive
consciousness.

# II. Decline of the Capitalist Mode of Production or Decline of Humanity?

It has often been thought and written that communism would blossom after the
destruction of the capitalist mode of production, which would be undermined by
such contradictions that its end would be inevitable. But numerous events of
this century have unfortunately brought other possibilities into view: the
return to “barbarism,” as analyzed by R. Luxemburg and the entire left wing of
the German workers’ movement, by Adorno and the Frankfurt School; the
destruction of the human species, as is evident to each and all today; finally
a state of stagnation in which the capitalist mode of production survives by
adapting itself to a degenerated humanity which lacks the power to destroy it.
In order to understand the failure of a future that was thought inevitable, we
must take into account the domestication of human beings implemented by all
class societies and mainly by capital, and we must analyze the autonomization
of capital.

We do not intend to treat these historical deviations exhaustively in a few
pages. By commenting on a passage in Marx’s *Grundrisse* we can show that it
is possible to understand the autonomization of capital on the basis of Marx’s
work, and we can also see the contradictions in Marxist thought and its
inability to solve the problem. The passage is from the chapter on the process
of circulation. To understand it, we should keep in mind what Marx had said
shortly before this passage:

> “**Circulation time thus appears as a barrier to the productivity of
> labour** = an increase in necessary labour time = a decrease in surplus
> labour time = a decrease in surplus value = an obstruction, a barrier to the
> self-realization process [*Selbstverwertungsprozess*] of capital.”[^25]

Here Marx makes an extremely important digression:

> “There appears here the universalizing tendency of capital, which
> distinguishes it from all previous stages of production and thus becomes the
> presupposition of a new mode of production, which is founded not on the
> development of the forces of production for the purpose of reproducing or at
> most expanding a given condition, but where the free, unobstructed,
> progressive and universal development of the forces of production is itself
> the presupposition of society and hence of its reproduction; where advance
> beyond the point of departure is the only presupposition.”[^26]

What makes capital a barrier is not stated here, whereas its revolutionary,
positive aspect is emphasized (this aspect is emphasized on many other pages
of the *Grundrisse*, and of *Capital*): the tendency toward universal
development of the forces of production. However, and this is what interests
us here, capital cannot realize this; it will be the task of another, superior
mode of production. The future of society here takes the form of an
indefinite, cumulative movement.

> “This tendency — which capital possesses, but which at the same time, since
> capital is a limited form of production, contradicts it and hence drives it
> towards dissolution — distinguishes capital from all earlier modes of
> production, and at the same time contains this element, that capital is
> posited as a mere point of transition.”[^27]

Hence capital is driven towards dissolution by this contradiction. It is a
pity that Marx did not here mention what he understands by “limited form of
production,” since this keeps us from “seeing” clearly what he means by
contradiction in this specific case. This conditions the understanding of the
statement that the capitalist mode of production is a transitory form of
production. Even without an explanation of the contradiction, we can
understand it as follows: the capitalist mode of production is not eternal —
Marx’s polemical argument against the bourgeois ideologues. This is the
content of his main statements. But another argument is embedded in the
preceding one: the capitalist mode of production is revolutionary and makes
possible the passage to another, superior social form where human beings will
no longer be dominated by the sphere of necessity (the sphere of the
production of material life) and where alienation will cease to exist.

Today, after the blossoming of Marxism as a theory of development, another
part of this sentence appears basic: there is a continuum between the two
periods. What is a transition if not the opposite of a break? This continuum
consists of the development of the forces of production. From which follows
the shameful but real relationship: Marx-Lenin-Stalin! But this is not our
topic. Our aim is to determine what constitutes the productive forces and for
whom they exist, according to Marx in the *Grundrisse*.

“All previous forms of society — or, what is the same, of the forces of social
production — foundered on the development of wealth.”[^28]

Wealth resides in the productive forces and in the results of their action.
There is a contradiction here which, according to Marx, characterizes the
totality of human history: wealth is necessary and therefore sought, but it
destroys societies. Societies must therefore oppose its development. This is
not the case in the capitalist mode of production (it thus destroys all other
social formations), which exalts the productive forces, but for whom?

“Those thinkers of antiquity who were possessed of consciousness therefore
directly denounced wealth as the dissolution of the community [*Gemeinwesen*].
The feudal system, for its part, foundered on urban industry, trade, modern
agriculture (even as a result of individual inventions like gunpowder and the
printing press). With the development of wealth — and hence also new powers
and expanded intercourse on the part of individuals — the economic conditions
on which the community [*Gemeinwesen*] rested were dissolved, along with the
political relations of the various constituents of the community which
corresponded to those conditions: religion, in which it was viewed in
idealized form (and both [religion and political relations] rested in turn on
a given relation to nature, into which all productive force resolves itself);
the character, outlook, etc. of the individuals. The **development of science
alone** — i.e. the most solid form of wealth, both its product and its
producer — was sufficient to dissolve these communities. But the **development
of science**, this ideal and at the same time practical wealth, is only one
aspect, one form in which the **development of the human productive forces**,
i.e. of wealth, appears. Considered **ideally**, the dissolution of a given
form of consciousness sufficed to kill a whole epoch. In reality, this barrier
to consciousness corresponds to a **definite degree of development of the
forces of material production** and hence of wealth. True, there was not only
a development on the old basis, but also a **development of this basis
itself**.”[^29]

For Marx, the productive forces are human (from the human being) and they are
for the human being, for the individual. Science as a productive force (thus
also wealth, as was already shown in the *1844 Manuscripts* and in *The German
Ideology*) is determined by the development of these forces and corresponds to
the appearance of a large number of externalizations, a greater possibility to
appropriate nature. Even if it takes an ambiguous form, the blossoming of the
human being is possible; it is the moment when, in the development of the
dominant class, individuals can find a model of a fuller life. For Marx, the
capitalist mode of production, by pushing the development of productive
forces, makes possible a liberating autonomization of the individual. This is
its most important revolutionary aspect.

> “The highest development of this basis itself (the flower into which it
> transforms itself; but it is always this basis, this plant as flower; hence
> wilting after the flowering and as a consequence of the flowering) is the
> point at which it is itself worked out, developed, into the form in which it
> is compatible with the highest development of the forces of production,
> hence also the richest development of the individuals. As soon as this point
> is reached, the further development appears as decay, and the new
> development begins from a new basis.”[^30]

There is decay because the development of individuals is blocked. It is not
possible to use this sentence to support the theory of the decline of the
capitalist mode of production[^31] since it would have to be stated that the
decline started, not at the beginning of this century, but minimally in the
middle of the previous century; or else it would have to be shown that the
decline of individuals is simultaneously the decline of capital, which
contradicts what can be observed; Marx himself repeatedly explained that the
development of capital was accompanied by the destruction of human beings and
of nature.

When did the development of productive forces accompany the development of
individuals in different societies? When was the capitalist mode of production
revolutionary for itself and for human beings? Do the productive forces
advance continually, in spite of moments when individuals decay? Marx said: “…
the further development appears as decay…” Do the productive forces stagnate;
does the capitalist mode of production decay?[^32]

The remainder of Marx’s digression confirms that the decay refers to human
beings. Individuals blossom when the productive forces allow them to develop,
when the evolution of one parallels the evolution of the other. By means of a
comparison with the pre-capitalist period, Marx shows that capital is not
hostile to wealth but, on the contrary, takes up its production. Thus it takes
up the development of productive forces. Previously the development of human
beings, of their community, was opposed to the development of wealth; now
there is something like symbiosis between them. For this to happen, a certain
mutation was necessary: capital had to destroy the limited character of the
individual; this is another aspect of its revolutionary character.

> “We saw earlier that property in the conditions of production was posited as
> identical with a limited, definite form of the community [*Gemeinwesen*],
> hence of the individual with the characteristics — limited characteristics
> and limited development of his productive forces — required to form such a
> community [*Gemeinwesen*]. This presupposition was itself in turn the result
> of a limited historic stage of the development of the productive forces, of
> wealth as well as the mode of creating it. The purpose of the community
> [*Gemeinwesen*], of the individual — as well as the condition of production
> — is the reproduction of **these specific conditions of production** and of
> the individuals, both singly and in their social groupings and relations —
> as living carriers of these conditions. Capital posits the **production of
> wealth** itself and hence the universal development of the productive
> forces, the constant overthrow of its prevailing presuppositions, as the
> presupposition of its reproduction. Value excludes no use value; i.e.
> includes no particular kind of consumption etc., of intercourse etc. as
> absolute condition; and likewise every degree of the development of the
> social forces of production, of intercourse, of knowledge etc. appears to it
> only as a barrier which it strives to overpower.”[^33]

This passage has momentous consequences. There is no reference to the
proletariat; it is the revolutionary role of capital to overthrow the
prevailing presuppositions. Marx had already said this, in a more striking
manner:

> “It is destructive towards all of this, and constantly revolutionizes it,
> tearing down all the barriers which hem in the development of the forces of
> production, the expansion of needs, the all-sided development of production,
> and the exploitation and exchange of natural and mental forces.”[^34]

We are forced to take a new approach toward the manner in which Marx situated
the proletarian class in the context of the continual upheaval carried out by
the capitalist mode of production. What is immediately evident is that the
capitalist mode of production is revolutionary in relation to the destruction
of ancient social relations, and that the proletariat is defined as
revolutionary in relation to capital. But it is at this point that the problem
begins: capitalism is revolutionary because it develops the productive forces;
the proletariat cannot be revolutionary if, after its revolution, it develops
or allows a different development of the productive forces. How can we
tangibly distinguish the revolutionary role of one from that of the other? How
can we justify the destruction of the capitalist mode of production by the
proletariat? This cannot be done in a narrowly economic context. Marx never
faced this problem because he was absolutely certain that the proletarians
would rise against capital. But we have to confront this problem if we are
going to emerge from the impasse created by our acceptance of the theory
according to which the production relations come into conflict with the
development of the productive forces (forces which were postulated to exist
for the human being, since if this were not the case, why would human beings
rebel?) If the productive forces do not exist for human beings but for
capital, and if they conflict with production relations, then this means that
these relations do not provide the proper structure to the capitalist mode of
production, and therefore there can be revolution which is not for human
beings (for example, the general phenomenon which is called fascism).
Consequently capital escapes. In the passage we are examining, Marx makes a
remarkable statement about the domination of capital:

> “Its own presupposition — value — is posited as product, not as a loftier
> presupposition hovering over production.”[^35]

Capital dominates value. Since labor is the substance of value, it follows
that capital dominates human beings. Marx refers only indirectly to the
presupposition which is also a product: wage labor, namely the existence of a
labor force which makes valorization possible:

> “The barrier to **capital** is that this entire development proceeds in a
> contradictory way, and that the working-out of the productive forces, of
> general wealth etc., knowledge etc., appears in such a way that the working
> individual **alienates** himself [*sich entaussert*]; relates to the
> conditions brought out of him by his labor as those not of his **own** but
> of an **alien wealth** and of his own poverty.”[^36]

How can this be a limit for capital? One might suppose that under-consumption
by the workers causes crises, and the final crisis. This is one possibility;
at least it appears that way at certain times. Marx always refused to ground a
theory of crises on this point, but this did not keep him from mentioning this
under-consumption. For Marx capital has a barrier because it despoils the
working individual. We should keep in mind that he is arguing against
apologists for capital and wants to show that the capitalist mode of
production is not eternal and does not achieve human emancipation. Yet in the
course of his analysis he points to the possibility for capital to escape from
human conditions. We perceive that it is not the productive forces that become
autonomous, but capital, since at a given moment the productive forces become
“a barrier which it strives to overpower.” This takes place as follows: the
productive forces are no longer productive forces of human beings but of
capital; they are for capital.[^37]

The despoliation (alienation) of the working individual cannot be a barrier
for capital, unless Marx means barrier in the sense of a weakness; such a
weakness would make capitalism inferior to other modes of production,
particularly if we contrast this weakness to the enormous development of
productive forces which it impels. In Marx’s work there is an ambiguity about
the subject to which the productive forces refer: are they for the human being
or for capital? This ambiguity grounds two interpretations of Marx. The
ethical interpretation (see especially Rubel) emphasizes the extent to which
Marx denounces the destruction of the human being by capital, and vigorously
insists that the capitalist mode of production can only be a transitory stage.
The interpretation of Althusser and his school holds that Marx does not
succeed in eliminating the human being from his economic analyses, which
reflects his inability to abandon ideological discourse, from which follows
Althusser’s problem of correctly locating the epistemological break.

It is possible to get out of this ambiguity. If capital succeeds in overcoming
this barrier, it achieves full autonomy. This is why Marx postulates that
capital must abolish itself; this abolition follows from the fact that it
cannot develop the productive forces for human beings while it makes possible
a universal, varied development which can only be realized by a superior mode
of production. This contains a contradiction: capital escapes from the grasp
of human beings, but it must perish because it cannot develop human productive
forces. This also contradicts Marx’s analysis of the destruction of human
beings by capital. How can destroyed human beings rebel? We can, if we avoid
these contradictions, consider Marx a prophet of the decline of capital, but
then we will not be able to understand his work or the present situation. The
end of Marx’s digression clarifies these contradictions.

> “But this antithetical form is itself fleeting, and produces the real
> conditions of its own suspension. The result is: the tendentially and
> potentially general development of the forces of production — of wealth as
> such — as a basis; likewise, the universality of intercourse, hence the
> world market as a basis. The basis as the possibility of the universal
> development of the individual, and the real development of the individuals
> from this basis as a constant suspension of its **barrier**, which is
> recognized as a barrier, not taken for a **sacred limit**. Not an ideal or
> imagined universality of the individual, but the universality of his real
> and ideal relations. Hence also the grasping of his own history as a
> **process**, and the recognition of nature (equally present as practical
> power over nature) as his real body. The process of development itself
> posited and known as the presupposition of the same. For this, however,
> necessary above all that the full development of the forces of production
> has become the **condition of production**; and not that specific
> **conditions of production** are posited as a limit to the development of
> the productive forces.”[^38]

If this process is to concern individuals, capital has to be destroyed and the
productive forces have to be for human beings. In the article, “La KAPD et le
mouvement proletarien,”[^39] we referred to this passage to indicate that the
human being is a possibility, giving a foundation to the statement: the
revolution must be human. This is in no way a discourse on the human being
conceived as invariant in every attribute, a conception which would merely be
a restatement of the immutability of human nature. But we have to point out
that this is still insufficient, since the development of productive forces
which, according to Marx, will take place in a superior mode of production, is
precisely the same development presently carried out by capital. The limit of
Marx is that he conceived communism as a new mode of production where
productive forces blossom. These forces are undoubtedly important, but their
existence at a certain level does not adequately define communism.

For Marx, capital overcomes its contradictions by engulfing them and by
mystifying reality. It can only apparently overcome its narrow base, its
limited nature which resides in the exchange of capital-money against labor
force. Capital must inevitably come into conflict with this presupposition;
thus Marx speaks of the opposition between private appropriation and
socialization of production. Private appropriation of what? Of surplus value,
which presupposes the proletarian, and thus the wage relation. But the entire
development of capital (and Marx’s own explanations are a precious aid in
understanding it) makes the mystification effective, making capital
independent of human beings, thus enabling it to avoid the conflict with its
presupposition. One might say that the conflict nevertheless persists, as a
result of the total process: socialization. This is true. But the
socialization of production and of human activity, the universal development
of the productive forces and thus the destruction of the limited character of
the human being — all this was only a **possible** ground for communism; it
did not pose communism automatically. Furthermore, the action of capital tends
constantly to destroy communism, or at least to inhibit its emergence and
realization. To transform this possible ground into reality, human
intervention is necessary. But Marx himself showed that capitalist production
integrates the proletariat. How could the destruction of human beings and of
nature fail to have repercussions on the ability of human beings to resist
capital and, *a fortiori*, to rebel?

Some will think we are attributing to Marx a position which is convenient to
us. We will cite an extraordinary passage:

> “What precisely distinguishes capital from the master-servant relation is
> that the **worker** confronts [capital] as consumer and possessor of
> exchange values, and that in the form of the **possessor of money**, in the
> form of money he becomes a simple center of circulation — one of its
> infinitely many centers, in which his specificity as worker is
> extinguished.”[^40]

One of the modalities of the re-absorbtion of the revolutionary power of the
proletariat has been to perfect its character as consumer, thus catching it in
the mesh of capital. The proletariat ceases to be the class that negates;
after the formation of the working class it dissolves into the social body.
Marx anticipates the poets of the “consumer society” and, as in other
instances, he explains a phenomenon which is observed only later and then
falsely, if only in terms of the name given to it.

The preceding observations do not lead to a fatalistic conception (this time
negative), such as: whatever we do, there’s no way out; it’s too late; or any
other mindless defeatism which would generate a sickening patch-work
reformism. First we have to draw the lesson. Capital has run away from human
and natural barriers; human beings have been domesticated: this is their
decadence. The revolutionary solution cannot be found in the context of a
dialectic of productive forces where the individual would be an element of the
contradiction. Present day scientific analyses of capital proclaim a complete
disregard for human beings who, for some, are nothing but a residue without
consistency. This means that the discourse of science is the discourse of
capital, or that science is possible only after the destruction of human
beings; it is a discourse on the pathology of the human being. Thus it is
insane to ground the hope of liberation on science. The position is all the
more insane where, as with Althusser, it cannot make its own break, liquidate
its “archeology,” since it remains faithful to a proletariat — a proletariat
which in this conception is merely an object of capital, an element of the
structure. But this inefficient, destroyed human being is the individual
produced by class societies. And on this we agree: the human being is dead.
The only possibility for another human being to appear is our struggle against
our domestication, our emergence from it. Humanism and scientism (and the
followers of “ethical science” *à la* Monod are the most absolute slaves of
capital) are two expressions of the domestication of humanity. All those who
nurse the illusion of the decadence of capital revive ancient humanist
conceptions or give birth to new scientific myths. They remain impermeable to
the revolutionary phenomenon running through our world.

Until now all sides have argued as if human beings remained unchanged in
different class societies and under the domination of capital. This is why the
role of the social context was emphasized (man, who was fundamentally good,
was seen to be modified positively or negatively by the social context) by the
materialist philosophers of the 18^th^ century, while Marxists emphasized the
role of an environment conditioned by the development of productive forces.
Change was not denied, and after Marx it was repeated that history was a
continual transformation of human nature. Nevertheless it was held explicitly
or implicitly that an irreducible element continued to allow human beings to
revolt against the oppression of capital. And capitalism itself was described
in a Manichean manner: on one side the positive pole, the proletariat, the
liberating class; on the other the negative pole, capital. Capital was
affirmed as necessary and as having revolutionized the life of human beings,
but it was described as an absolute evil in relation to the good, the
proletariat. The phenomenon which emerges today does not in the least destroy
the negative evaluation of capital, but forces us to generalize it to the
class which was once antagonistic to it and carried within itself all the
positive elements of human development and today of humanity itself. This
phenomenon is the recomposition of a community and of human beings by capital,
reflecting human community like a mirror. The theory of the looking glass
could only arise when the human being became a tautology, a reflection of
capital. Within the world of the despotism of capital (this is how society
appears as of today), neither a good nor an evil can be distinguished.
Everything can be condemned. Negating forces can only arise outside of
capital. Since capital has absorbed all the old contradictions, the
revolutionary movement has to reject the entire product of the development of
class societies. This is the crux of its struggle against domestication,
against the decadence of the human species. This is the essential moment of
the process of formation of revolutionaries, absolutely necessary for the
production of revolution.

[^1]: This does not exclude an opposite movement: capital forces human beings
    to be human.

[^2]: Karl Marx, *Grundrisse*, London: Pelican, 1973, p. 365.

[^3]: Here we see a convergence with the Asiatic mode of production, where
    classes could never become autonomous; in the capitalist mode of
    production they are absorbed.

[^4]: See the book of D. Verres, *Le discours du capitalisme*, Ed. L’Herne.
    interesting material will also be found in the works of Baudrillard: *Le
    systéme des objets* and *Pour une critique de l’économle politique du
    signe*, Ed. Gallimard.

[^5]: Dichter, cited by Baudrillard in *Le système des objets*, pp. 218–219.

[^6]: Valerie Solanas, *The SCUM Manifesto* (The Society for Cutting Up Men),
    New York: Olympia Press, 1970.

[^7]: We analyzed the autonomization of capital in *Le VIe chapitre inédit du
    Capital et l’oeuvre économique de Marx* (1966), particularly in the notes
    added in 1972.

    In a future article we will analyze this subject more thoroughly by
    showing that Marx had raised the problem without recognizing it in its
    totality, and by analyzing the capitalist mode of production of today.
    This will also lead us to define labor and its role in the development of
    humanity. G. Brulé already began such an analysis in his article in
    *Invariance* No. 2, Série II: “Le travail, le travail productif et les
    mythes de la classe ouvriére et de la classe moyenne.” (Labor, productive
    labor and the myths of the working class and the middle class).

    In general we can say that the concept of labor is reductive: it
    encompasses only one part of human activity. But the call for its
    abolition is a call for the destruction of this remainder of activity,
    which is a utopian demand of capital. The project of communism inserts
    itself into the context of human life, activity being no more than a
    modality of expression. Love, meditation, day-dreaming, play and other
    manifestations of human beings are placed outside the field of life when
    we trap ourselves within the concept of labor. Marx defined labor as an
    activity which transforms nature or matter for one or another purpose, but
    the concept of nature can no longer be accepted as it is. In the period of
    domination of capital, the human being is no longer in contact with nature
    (especially during work). Between nature and the individual lies capital.
    Capital becomes nature.

    On the other hand, in his so-called “philosophical” works, Marx clearly
    refers to all human activity and asserts that communism cannot be reduced
    to the liberation of labor. This position does not completely disappear
    from the rest of Marx’s works, and survives alongside the “revolutionary
    reformist” conception expressed in *Capital*. For the Marxists the problem
    is subsequently simplified: they exalt labor, pure and simple. In
    Trotsky’s work, for example, there is no longer a trace of Marx’s complex
    analysis, but rather a display of the language of domestication, the
    language of capital: “The entire history of humanity is a history of the
    organization and education of social man for labor, with a view to
    obtaining from him greater productivity.” (*Terrorism and Communism*
    (French ed.: Paris: Ed. 10/18, 1963, p. 2181.)

[^8]: This possibility is described and exalted in *Future Shock* by Alvin
    Toffler.

[^9]: Marx, *Capital*, Vol. I (*Le Capital*, I. 1, t. 2, p. 182.)

[^10]: This requires a detailed study which would include the analysis of
    labor. In the article which follows we begin this study: it presents the
    first conclusions we’ve reached. In particular we want to analyze the
    stage of this decadence of humanity, how it is expressed, etc. In addition
    we want to show the intimate connection between the movement of value and
    the dialectic of the productive forces. The end of the movement of value
    and of capital is the end of a mode of representation and destroys its
    autonomy. The Marxian dialectic will be completely overcome.

[^11]: Engels, Marx, *The German Ideology*, (Moscow, 1964, p. 85.)

[^12]: Engels, “Preface” to *The Poverty of Philosophy* by Marx, New York:
    1963, p. 11.

[^13]: See particularly “The Movement of Income in Modern Society” and “Crises
    and Possibilities of Adaptation” in *Presuppositions of Socialism and the
    tasks of Social Democracy*, Rowohlt Verlag, pp. 75ff.

[^14]: Here we should be careful, as Bordiga justly observed, not to reduce
    this to an economic concept.

[^15]: Marx, *Capital*, Vol. 1, New York: Random House, pp. 831–837.

[^16]: In the original Fredy Perlman translation the two sentences immediately
    before this, beginning ‘But at this moment (…)’, were shown as a quotation
    from Marx and a reference was given to an english translation of Marx’s
    text ‘The King of Prussia (etc.)’. Looking at the french text this is
    evidently an error based on a misprint and this sentence is actually by
    Camatte. Thanks to Antagonism for drawing attention to this.

[^17]: Which proves that it was impossible to hold on to a “classist”
    discourse and behavior while maintaining the basic “aclassist” thesis of
    the necessity of the proletariat’s self-negation.

[^18]: On this subject, see the book by H. Mueller published in 1892, *Der
    Klassenkampf in der Deutschen Sozialdemokratie*, Verlags-kooperative
    Heidelberg-Frankfurt-Hanover-Berlin, 1969. This book clearly shows the
    duality-duplicity of men like Bebel, who expressed themselves as
    “rightists” in parliament and as “leftists” at workers’ meetings, who told
    one audience it would be very long before the principles of socialism
    could be realized, while telling another that socialism was around the
    corner. This book is also interesting because it contains positions which
    were later to be taken up by the KAPD (German Communist Workers’ Party).

[^19]: Bordiga at meeting in Milan, 1960.

[^20]: Absolute irreversibility is not a fact of history. Possibilities which
    appeared thousands or hundreds of years ago were not abolished for all
    time. History is not a Moloch which swallows possibilities, condemning the
    human future to an inevitable and irremediable despoliation. In that case
    history would be no more than a justification for what happened. Many
    would like to reduce history to this, making it the worst of despots.

    Hegel’s philosophy with its dialectic of supersession (*Aufhebung*), of
    movement which abolishes and preserves at one and the same time, was an
    attempt to salvage what human beings had produced in earlier epochs. Hegel
    was troubled by the problems of loss of reality, of the multiplicity of
    manifestations and possibles, etc. Thus he attached enormous importance to
    memory (see particularly the chapter “Absolute Knowledge,” in the
    *Phenomenology of Mind*.)

    By contrast, the movement of capital abolishes the memory of its previous
    stages (by mystification and magic) as well as the stages of humanity, and
    presents itself, as it is, at its highest level of development — the
    “reified” (or ossified) form” (See Marx, *Theories of Surplus Value*,
    (Moscow: 1971) , Vol. III, chapter on “Revenue and its Sources. Vulgar
    Political Economy.”

[^21]: The concept of mode of production is in reality valid only for the
    capitalist mode of production, just as the concept of class is in reality
    operative only in bourgeois society. The concept of production in Marx’s
    work is quite rich in attributes. It becomes impoverished when we move
    from the *1844 Manuscripts* and *The German Ideology* to *Capital*. It is
    closely related to the concept of nature and also to a certain conception
    of the human being. In other words, we have a much more complex “given”
    when we can examine it only in relation to the existence of initial
    communist communities and their dissolution. The separation of the human
    being from the community (*Gemeinwesen*) is a despoliation. The human
    being as worker has lost a mound of attributes which formed a whole when
    he was related to his community.

    The process of expropriation of human beings is real. Those who do not
    understand this do not understand what capital is. Man has been reduced to
    an inexpressive being; he has lost his senses, and his activity has been
    reduced to quantified labor. Man turned into abstract being longs for
    music which still preserves the ancestral sensuality (thus the vogue of
    jazz and South American music). The reduced human being now has only one
    element relating him to the external world: sexuality which fills the void
    of the senses. It is precisely this which explains the pansexuality, or
    more exactly the pansexualization of being which Freud interpreted as an
    invariant characteristic of human beings, whereas it is the result of
    their mutilation. What is the subconscious if not the affective-sensual
    life of the human being repressed by capital? The human being has to be
    domesticated, shaped to a rationality which he must internalize — the
    rationality of the process of production of capital. Once this
    domestication is achieved, the human being is dispossessed of this
    repressed sensual life which becomes an object of knowledge, of science;
    it becomes capitalizable. The unconscious, becoming an object of commerce,
    is thinly sliced and retailed in the market of knowledge. The unconscious
    did not always exist, and it exists now only as a component in the
    discourse of capital; this is also true of human perversions.

    Reduced to perfect inexpressivity, the human being increasingly becomes
    comparable point by point to the elementary particle studied by nuclear
    physics, where one can find the principles of the psychology of the
    capitalized human being who is moved by the field of capital.

[^22]: It is also unsound to speak of primitive society. We will substantiate
    this by making a new analysis of primitive communities. If it is true that
    Marx’s work does not deal adequately with the existence, development and
    dissolution of primitive communities, it is not true that Marx is
    absolutely wrong because of Europocentrism or the spirit of enlightenment,
    namely that his work suffers from the same shortcomings as bourgeois
    theory. The majority of those who hold this view have not understood the
    question of community in Marx’s work and have reduced his work to a simple
    historical materialism.

    What Marx’s work lacks is a detailed analysis of the way “the economy”
    appears in primitive communities and provokes their disintegration.

    We should add that it is becoming increasingly misleading to speak of
    capitalist society. We will return to this.

[^23]: In primitive communities human beings rule technology. Technology
    starts to become autonomous in ancient Western society, and this was
    feared by the ancients. Technology forces man to copy nature, even if
    later he can find a procedure not found in nature; thus he is subjected to
    a compulsory procedure, a how-to-do, a sort of natural order. He seems to
    lose the capacity to create freely. (On this subject, see the comments of
    J.P. Vernant in *Mythe et pensée chez les grecs*, Ed. Maspéro.) When human
    beings no longer fear technology, they simultaneously become reconciled
    with art, which had been disparaged at the end of slave society. This took
    place at the time of the Renaissance, when philosophers defined man as a
    being who makes himself (See Cassirer, *Individual and Cosmos in
    Renaissance Philosophy*). But the development of technology did not lead
    man toward nature; on the contrary, it led to the expropriation of man and
    the destruction of nature. The human being increasingly loses the faculty
    of creativity. In this sense, the fear of the ancients was justified.

    From the philosophers of the Renaissance, through Descartes and Hegel, to
    Marx, the human being is defined in relation to technology (man is a
    tool-maker: Franklin) and to production. To go beyond Marx, it is
    necessary to reexamine the “human phenomenon” from the disintegration of
    primitive communities until today and to rethink the works of philosophers
    and economists from Aristotle to Marx in order to understand more clearly
    how human beings perceived themselves in a period when value and then
    capital dominated, and in order to understand how, now that we have come
    to the end of the phenomenon value, we can conceive humanity, and thus
    communism.

[^24]: “Origine et fonction de la forme parti” (1961), published in
    *Invariance*, No. 1, Serie 1.

[^25]: Marx, *Grundrisse*, London: Pelican, 1973, p. 539.

[^26]: *Ibid*., p. 540.

[^27]: *Ibid*.

[^28]: *Ibid*.

[^29]: *Ibid*., pp. 540–541.

[^30]: *Ibid*., p. 541.

[^31]: As is done by Victor in *Révolution Internationale* No. 7, série 1, p.
    4 of the article “Volontarisme et confusion.”

[^32]: Various authors have spoken of stagnation and declining production
    between the two world wars. Bordiga always rejected the theory of the
    decline of the capitalist mode of production as a gradualist deformation
    of Marx’s theory (see “Le renversement de la praxis dans la théorie
    marxiste,” in *Invariance* No. 4, série 1.

[^33]: Marx, *Grundrisse*, p. 541.

[^34]: *Ibid*., p. 410.

[^35]: *Ibid*., P. 541.

[^36]: *Ibid*.

[^37]: This is what Marx shows when he analyzes fixed capital in the
    Grundrisse, and also in Book I of *Capital* “where he analyzes the
    transformation of the work process into a process of production of capital
    (see also *Un chapitre inédit du Capital*, Paris: Ed. 10/18, 1971).

[^38]: Marx, *Grundrisse*, pp. 541–542.

[^39]: *Invariance*, Série II, No. 1.

[^40]: Marx, *Grundrisse*, pp. 420–421.
