% Against Domestication
% Jacques Camatte
% 1973

## Introduction

The time we are now living through is without doubt the most critical period
capitalist society has ever known. All the features which we associate with
the classic crisis now exist as a permanent state of affairs, though
production itself has not been affected, except to a limited extent in certain
countries. Social relations and traditional consciousness are decomposing all
around us, while at the same time each institution in society proceeds to
ensure its survival by recuperating the movement which opposes it. (An obvious
example here is the catholic church, which has lost count of all the
“modernizations” it has embraced). One would think that the violence and
torture which is now endemic everywhere would have people mobilized and up in
arms against it, but instead it continues to flourish on a world scale.
Indeed, the situation today makes the “barbarism” of the Nazis seem in
comparison rather unprofessional, quite archaic in fact. All the conditions
would seem to be ripe; there should be revolution. Why then is there such
restraint? What is to stop people from transforming all these crises and
disasters, which are themselves the result of the latest mutation of capital,
into a catastrophe for capital itself?

The explanation for this is to be found in the domestication of humanity,
which comes about when capital constitutes itself as a human community. The
process starts out with the fragmentation and destruction of human beings, who
are then restructured in the image of capital; people are turned into
capitalist beings, and the final outcome is that capital is anthropomorphised.
The domestication of humanity is closely bound up with another phenomenon
which has intensified even further the passivity of human beings: capital has
in effect “escaped”. Economic processes are out of control and those who are
in a position to influence them now realize that in the face of this they are
powerless: they have been completely outmanoeuvered. At the global level,
capital’s escape is evident in the monetary crisis;[^1] overpopulation,
pollution and the exhaustion of natural resources. The domestication of
humanity and the escape of capital are concepts which can explain the
mentality and activity of those who claim to be revolutionaries and believe
that they can intervene to hasten the onset of revolution: the fact is that
they are playing roles which are a part of the old world. The revolution
always eludes them and when there is any kind of upheaval they see it as
something external to them, which they have to chase after in order to be
acknowledged as “revolutionaries”.

For a considerable time, human beings have, strictly speaking, been
outstripped by the movement of capital which they are no longer able to
control. This explains why some people think that the only solution is flight
into the past, as with the fashionable preoccupation with mysticism, zen, yoga
and tantraism in the U.S. Others would rather take refuge in the old myths
which reject the total and all-pervading tyranny of science and technology.
(Often this is all combined with the use of some drug which gives the illusion
of the rapid arrival of a world different from the horror we are now living
through.[^2]) On the other hand, there are people who say that only science
and technology can be relied upon to provide the answers — which would explain
why certain women in the feminist movement are able to envisage their
emancipation through parthenogenesis or by the production of babies in
incubators.[^3] There are others who believe they can fight against violence
by putting forward remedies against aggressiveness, and so on. These people
all subscribe, in a general way, to the proposition that each problem
presupposes its own particular scientific solution. They are therefore
essentially passive, since they take the view that the human being is a simple
object to be manipulated. They are also completely unequipped to create new
interhuman relationships (which is something they have in common with the
adversaries of science); they are unable to see that a scientific solution is
a capitalist solution, because it eliminates humans and lays open the prospect
of a totally controlled society.[^4]

We now come to the category of people who feel that they have to “do
something”: they are now having to realize that their understanding of the
situation is totally inadequate, and their efforts to conceal this fact only
makes their powerlessness more obvious. The “silent majority”, who make up the
rest, are permeated with the belief that it is pointless to do anything,
because they simply have no perspective. Their silence is not consent pure and
simple, but rather evidence of their incapacity to intervene in any way. The
proof of this is that when they are mobilized, it is never for something but
against it. Their particular passivity is therefore negative.

It is important to note that the two groups referred to above — the activists
and the silent majority — cannot be catalogued simply as left and right: the
old political dichotomy no longer operates here. The confusion which this
raises is nevertheless important in relation to the attitude taken towards
science, since in the past it was people on the left who were very committed
to science, whereas now it is being condemned by the New Left (in the United
States for example). The leftright dichotomy lives on, however, among the old
regroupements, the parties of the left and right and all the rackets of the
past, but these oppositions have all ceased to matter: in one way or another
they each defend capital equally. The most active of all are the various
communist parties because they defend capital by espousing exactly the same
scientific forms and rational structures which capital uses to maintain
itself.

All the movements of the left and right are functionally the same in as much
as they all participate in a larger, more general movement towards the
destruction of the human species. Whether people stay confined within certain
obsolete strategies and forms, or whether they submit to the mechanisms of
technology — either way the result is the same. Historically, the categories
of left and right seem to emerge as a duality at the beginning elf the
nineteenth century when the capitalist mode of production was beginning to
exert its real domination over the process of production, and was becoming a
true social force. Thus certain people like Carlyle found themselves in
opposition to the apologists of capital,[^5] but it was left to Marx to go
further: he affirmed the necessity of developing productive forces (and
therefore science and technology as well), and at the same time denounced
their negative effects on people in the immediate situation. But he thought
that all this would eventually lead to a contradiction such that the
development of productive forces would no longer be possible without the
destruction of the capitalist mode of production. Thereafter these forces
would be directed by people themselves, and alienation would cease to exist.
But this was to presuppose that capital would not be able to become truly
autonomous, that it could not escape from the constraints of the social and
economic base on which it is built: the law of value, the exchange of capital
and labour power, the rigorous general equivalent (gold), and so on.

By simply having interiorized the social base on which it is built, capital
has become autonomous, from which point it has then been able to make its
escape. The headlong plunge of its development over a number of years has now
let loose grave dangers for humanity and for the whole of nature. Not even the
keen-witted experts and the droning old bores can remain aloof any longer from
the dangers that now confront us. To a certain degree, they are even obliged
to join in the company of those who talk in terms of an apocalyptic future.
The apocalypse is fashionable because our world is nearing its end, a world in
which human beings, in spite of all the evidence of their weakness and
degradation, had always remained the norm, the reference point of the world.
But having been presented with the fact that God is dead, we now hear the
proclamation of the death of the human being. Both God and humans yield in
turn to science, which is at once the goddess and servant of capital: science
presents itself in today’s world as the study of mechanisms of adaptation
which will assimilate human beings and nature into the structure of capital’s
productive activity. All the signs indicate that it is those who are least
destroyed as people, and particularly young people, who now find themselves
unable to accept this onslaught of adaptation and domestication; hence they
are impelled to refuse the system.

The process of domestication is sometimes brought about violently, as happens
with primitive accumulation; more often it proceeds insidiously because
revolutionaries continue to think according to assumptions which are implicit
in capital and the development of productive forces, and all of them share in
exalting the one divinity, science. Hence domestication and repressive
consciousness have left our minds fossilized more or less to the point of
senility; our actions have become rigidified and our thoughts stereotyped. We
have been the soulless frozen masses fixated on the post, believing all the
time that we were gazing ahead into the future. But at the time of May/June
’68, a new life erupted and the movement of growth towards communism was taken
up again. No new theory was produced, nor did any new modes of action appear.
The important fact was that the struggle had a new aim. It had nothing to do
with politics, ideology, science or even social science (the latter having
been totally discredited). Rather, it was a specific and vital need asserted
against this society and independently of it: to end the passivity imposed by
capital, to rediscover communication between people and to unleash free
creativity and unrestrained imagination in a movement of human becoming.

## The Mythology of the Proletariat

With the advent of May/June ’68 everything changed and everything has kept on
changing ever since. This is why it is not possible to understand the lycée
insurrection of 1973 (discussed below) and its possible potential except in
relation to this earlier movement.

According to our analysis of it, the activity of May/June ’68 was clear
evidence that revolution had positively re-emerged, signifying the beginning
of a new revolutionary cycle. But our argument here proceeded according to a
classist analysis: thus we went on to declare that the May movement would
result in the proletariat being recalled to its class base. More than this, we
found in the events of that period confirmation of our belief that the
revolution would follow a course of development along lines laid down by Marx.
But in point of fact, the first classes to rise up in 1968 were the social
strata closest to the established society, made up of people whose objective
interests were closely aligned with those of the state. The oppressed classes
followed on later, and it was they who radically resolved the contradictions
that the other social strata wanted only to reform. Now the course of
development followed by the English and French revolutions provided the
underlying substance from which Marx’s thought was moulded. Thus in the case
of the French revolution, the nobility intervened in the situation in the very
early stages, this being the famous nobles’ revolt which took place some years
before 1789, which picked up and aided the struggle of he bourgeoisie (at the
same time preparing the way for enlightened despotism). There then followed
the bourgeois strata less tied to the state, which formed, as Kautsky
remarked, a kind of intelligentsia. Only then, with the failure of reform, the
internal collapse of the system and the fall of the monarchy, were the
peasants and artisans drawn in (the fourth estate, the future proletariat),
and it was they who created the final decisive break and ensured that there
would be no turning back. Without them, the revolution, in as much as it
involved a change in the mode of production, would have taken much longer. In
Russia there was similar pattern of development. The suggestion here is that
those who are most oppressed and have the greatest objective interest in
rebelling — and who form, according to some, the true revolutionary class —
can only in fact bring themselves into movement during a period when there has
already been a rupture at the core of society, and the state has been
considerably weakened. Out of the turmoil there begins to emerge a new
perspective, if only through the realization that life is not going to
continue as before, that it has become necessary to find some other way. This
process is one of those elements that gives every revolution a character that
is not strictly classist. It will be more accentuated in the case of the
communist revolution, because it won’t be the activity of one class only, but
of humanity rising up against capital.

At the centre of what we at one time ventured to call the universal class, or
more simply humanity (for both are now the slaves of capital), there are
social strata which exist in very close affinity with capital, (i.e. the new
middle classes and the students) who are rebelling against the system. They
see themselves as distinct strata in society to the extent that they claim to
be able to detonate a movement which will revolutionize the proletariat and
set it in motion — but this is just a caricature of revolution, dragged out
for the occasion dressed up in all its old regalia awkwardly going through the
same old motions.

The classist analysis which we adopted originally could never do more than
interpret real events. The same shortcoming affected the participants of May
’68 and made it possible for them to perceive themselves according to the old
schemas. It is becoming increasingly obvious that these active participants
were men and women who were personally and very intimately involved in the
life and functioning of capital, and more especially were having to justify
and maintain its representation,[^6] who then went into revolt against it. But
their revolt is completely recuperable as long as it moves on the worn out
road of class struggle which aspires to awaken the proletariat and make it
accomplish its mission.

Here we meet a clear impasse. The role of the proletariat has been to destroy
the capitalist mode of production in order to liberate the productive forces
imprisoned within it: communism was to begin only after this action was
accomplished. But far from imprisoning the productive forces, capitalism
raises them to new heights, because they exist for the benefit of capital, not
humanity. The proletariat therefore, is superfluous. The reversal referred to
just now, whereby the productive forces are liberated by capital, rather than
by the proletariat, which has been made possible thanks to the development of
science, is a development in parallel with the domestication of human beings.
Their domestication is their acceptance of the development of capital as
theorized by Marxism, which is itself the arch-defender of the growth of
productive forces. In the course of this development, the proletariat as
producer of surplus value has been denied even this function by the
generalization of wage labour and the destruction of any possible distinction
between productive and unproductive work. The once revered proletariat has now
become the strongest upholder of the capitalist mode of production. What does
the proletariat want? And those who speak in the name of the proletariat and
happily venerate its name — what do they want? If it is full employment and
self-management, this would only ensure the permanent continuity of the
capitalist mode of production since it has now become humanized. The left all
believe that the process of production, being rationality in action, only
needs to be made to function for human needs. But this rationality is capital
itself.

The mythology of the proletariat accounts for how the “populism” of May ’68,
as we called it, became “proletarianism”. People started to say: “We must go
to the proletariat, revive its fighting spirit, summon up its capacities for
self-sacrifice and then it can kick out the evil bosses and follow the other
‘proletarians’ down the road to revolution.”

May ’68 ushered in a period of great scorn and confusion. People were scornful
of themselves because they weren’t “proletarian”, and they scorned each other
for the same reason, whereas they were all confused about the proletariat, the
class that had always been considered potentially revolutionary. There is no
other way to explain the impasse encountered by the movement which formed
itself in opposition to the established society. This impasse did not however
become clear all at once, because in the enthusiasm which followed May ’68 the
movement of opposition took on a certain life of its own, and the essential
questions were allowed to remain on the sidelines. But not only this, the
shock of May ’68 caused a revival and a re-emergence of the currents of the
workers movement which had up to then been held in great disdain by the
established parties and consigned to oblivion: the council movement in all its
variants, the old German Communist Workers Party (KAPD), the ideas of
individuals like Lukacs and Korsch, and so on. This resurrection of the past
was a sign that people had not grasped directly the reality of the situation,
and that the situation itself was unable to engender new forms of struggle and
other theoretical approaches. Nevertheless, to intellectually retrace that
path already so well travelled is even still a form of revolt, because it
won’t bow to the tyranny of what has simply “happened”. It can moreover be a
starting point in finding out about the origins of the wandering of humanity,
and a first step in confronting humanity’s fate which is to have been excluded
from its own human context and condemned to the productivist sewer.

We were speaking earlier of an “impasse”. As an image it is not as suggestive
as we would like, but it is nevertheless the heart of the matter. It is like a
wall which stands in front of all the different groups of this vast current in
society, and this wall is the proletariat and its representation.[^7]
Militants go from one group to another, and as they do so they “change”
ideology, dragging with them each time the same load of intransigence and
sectarianism. A few of them manage, extremely large trajectories, going from
Leninism to situationism, to rediscover neo-bolshevism and then passing to
councilism. They all come up against this wall and are thrown back further in
some cases than in others. The wall is an effective barrier against any
possible theoretical and practical combination. (In Germany you can even come
across antiauthoritarian trotskyists, Korschist trotskyists, etc.)

Admittedly, within these groups, just as with certain individuals, there are
aspects which are far from negative, since a certain number of things have
been properly understood; but even this understanding is deformed by the
jack-of-all-trades mentality which is the spiritual complement of coming
together in a groupscule.

In previous articles[^8] it has been clearly shown that it is not possible to
find the key to the representation of the proletariat without first calling
into question the Marxist conception of the development of the productive
forces, the law of value, and so on. Yet the proletariat is made into a
fetish, and because it raises such strong ethical and practical implications,
it is still the one element which weighs most heavily on the consciousness of
revolutionaries. But once this fetish is challenged and seen for what it is,
then the whole theoretical/ ideological edifice just collapses in confusion.
And yet there still seems to be this unspoken assumption that each individual
must be attached to a group and be identified as a part of it in order to have
the security and strength to face the enemy. There is the fear of being alone
— accompanied nonetheless by a genuine realization that it is necessary to
join together to destroy capitalism — but there is also the fear of
individuality,[^9] an inability to confront in an autonomous way the
fundamental questions of our period. It is another manifestation of the
domestication of human beings suffering from the disease of dependency.

## The Lycée Movement, Paris, 1973

Following on this, the real importance of the lycée movement (Spring, 1973)
can be better appreciated. It brought into clear perspective something that
had only been seen in outline in May’68: the critique of repressive
consciousness. Repressive consciousness originated with Marxism in so far as
the latter is a concrete formula for the future of the human species:
proletarian revolution was supposed to come about when the development of the
productive forces allowed it. This legalistic and repressive consciousness
operates by explaining away popular uprisings, branding them as premature,
petit-bourgeois, the work of irresponsible elements, etc. It is a
consciousness which goes to the roots of reification, because it can only be
organized consciousness, taking the form of parties, unions and groupuscles.
Each of them organizes repression against those who are not organized, or who
are not organized according to their particular methods. The difference
between these organizations is measured by the amount of repression they are
prepared to exercise.

Now the critique of repressive consciousness does not attack the myth of the
proletariat directly by arguing over it, but rather more indirectly, by
ignoring it and treating it with derision. The young people on this occasion
didn’t fall into the trap of looking to workerist organizations in order to
form a unified front in the style of May ’68. But politicians of all kinds
went after them trying to get them “involved”: the PCF, PS, PSU, CGT,
CFDT[^10] and the rest went chasing after high school kids trying to persuade
them that they were all somehow under the same banner. When the students broke
away from the unitary demonstrations, as they very often did, out came the
political masquerade obscenely offering itself for sale: the veteran political
hacks and the hardened old temptresses of the PCF and the CCT, discovering
five years after May ’68 the political importance of youth, marching along
demanding deferment for everyone, while the students looked on and jeered. It
seemed almost as though the young people had been spirited off and their
places taken by their elders !

More ridicule was in store for the politicians of every variety who affirmed
once again during these events the primacy of the proletariat, declaring that
the critical revolutionary moment was to be occasioned by a strike of skilled
workers. This is because they can’t conceive of revolution unless it appears
dressed in overalls. Skilled workers do not threaten the capitalist system;
the capitalist mode of production has long since accepted rises in wages, and
as for working conditions, capital is well qualified to improve them. Thus the
abolition of assembly line work is a well recognized necessity in some bosses’
circles.

The lycée movement belittled the institutions of society and their defenders.
Those who wanted (albeit reluctantly) to bring themselves down to the level of
“our valiant youngsters” behaved ridiculously — after all, recuperation has to
pay its price. On the other hand, those who wanted to counter the movement
from within and didn’t succeed, just proceeded to despise it, and in this
manner they brought down a similar ridicule on themselves. But then it was the
turn of the men of government: out they came, bleating about how we’ve already
got deputies and a parliament and that we should make use of them to sort out
the problems that remain unsolved. The young people acted as though none of
this existed. Once again, as in May ’68, there was no communication, no
understanding between the two sides (“We’re not closed to arguments, but
really I don’t know what it is they want” — Fontanet, the Education minister).
They fondly imagine that young people want to discuss with them and present
opposing arguments. This is a revolution of life itself,[^11] a search for
another way of living. Dialogue should be concerned only with the plans and
ideas for realizing this desire. No dialogue can take place between the social
order and those who are to overthrow it. If dialogue is still seen as a
possibility, then this would be an indication that the movement is faltering.

Underlying all this is a profoundly important phenomenon: all human life, from
the very beginning of its development within capitalist society, has undergone
an impoverishment. More than this, capitalist society is death organized with
all the appearances of life. Here it is not a question of death as the
extinction of life, but death-in-life, death with all the substance and power
of life. The human being is dead and is no more than a ritual of capital.
Young people still have the strength to refuse this death; they are able to
rebel against domestication. They demand to live. But to those great numbers
of smugly complacent people, who live on empty dreams and fantasies, this
demand, this passionate need just seems irrational, or, at best, a paradise
which is by definition inaccessible.

Youth remains a serious problem for capital because it is a part of society
which is still undomesticated. The lycée students demonstrated not only
against military service and the army, but also, and just as much, against the
school, the university and the family. Schools function as the organization of
the passivity of the soul, and this is true even when active and libertarian
methods are used; the liberation of the school would be the liberation of
oppression. In the name of history, science and philosophy, each individual is
sent down a corridor of passivity, into a world surrounded by walls. Knowledge
and theory are just so many insurmountable barriers which prevent one
individual from recognizing other individuals, making dialogue between them
impossible. Discourse must proceed along certain channels, but that’s all. And
then at the end of the pipeline, there is the army, which is a factory for
domestication; it organizes people into a general will to kill others,
structuring the dichotomy already imprinted in their minds by the secular
morality of “my nation” and “other people”, all of whom are potential enemies.
People are trained and educated to know how to justify the unjustifiable — the
killing of men and women.

We do not deny that this agitation before Easter had largely reformist
tendencies. The reformist aspects were what attracted recuperation, but that
is not what interests us here because it tells us nothing about the real
movement of struggle of the species against capital. As with May ’68, this
movement was superficial, (though only a more radical agitation from beneath
could have raised it to the surface in the first place), and it will open the
door to an improved restructuring of the despotism of capital, enabling it
better to realize its own “modernization”.

## The Despotism of Capital

Schools and universities are structures that are too rigid for the global
process of capital, and the same thing holds true for the army.[^12] The rapid
decline of knowledge and the development of mass media have destroyed the old
school system. Teachers and professors are, from the point of view of capital,
useless beings who will tend to be eliminated in favour of programmed lessons
and teaching machines. (In just the same way, capital tends to eliminate the
bureaucracy because it inhibits the transmission of information which is the
very basis of capital’s mobility.) It is ironic then that many people who
argue for the necessity of life turn out to be readily convinced by solutions
which entrust teaching to machines and thus eliminate human life. As a general
rule, it may be said that all who embrace “modernization” are in fact
provoking their own condemnation as individuals with a certain function in
this society; they are demanding their own dispossession. But even those
others who preach about the need to return to the rigid and authoritarian
climate which prevailed before 1968 will not fare any better, because in order
for their plans to succeed, they still have to depend on capital, and either
way, left or right, capital profits equally.

Capital imposes its despotism on human beings by means of objects and things
which are invested with new modes of being appropriate to capital’s new
requirements. It implies a world of things which are in rapid motion,
constantly changing and differentiating themselves (a process which is clearly
not unrelated to a feeling of meaninglessness). These qualities inevitably
conflict with traditional social relations and previous ways of life,
including previous ways of thinking. It is things which are the real subjects.
They impose their own rhythm of life and ensure that people are confined to
the level of their own single existences. But because objects and things are
themselves governed and controlled by the movement of capital, there is always
the possibility that this rising new oppression could actually set in motion
an insurrectional movement against the society of capital itself. And yet
capital in its turn is able to profit from subversion in order to consolidate
itself, as it did during the early years of this century. The revolt of the
proletariat, confined as it was to the terrain of the factory and emphasizing
the ordering of production, was a factor which actually aided capital in its
movement towards real domination. The end result was the elimination of strata
that were unnecessary for the progress of capital, the triumph of full
employment, the abandonment of laissez-faire liberalism, and so on.

We are not suggesting that revolution should rise directly out of the conflict
we were speaking of just now, nor are we saying that the instigators of it
will be men and women who are ordinarily very conservative. The point we want
to emphasize is this: capital must come to dominate all human beings, and in
order to do this it can no longer depend entirely for its support on the old
social strata which are in turn coming under threat themselves. This is a
tendency which Franz Borkenau understood very precisely:

> “In this tremendous contrast with previous revolutions, one fact is
> reflected. Before these latter years, counter-revolution usually depended on
> the support of reactionary powers which were technically and intellectually
> inferior to the forces of revolution. This has changed with the advent of
> fascism. Now, every revolution is likely to meet the attack of the most
> modern, most efficient, most ruthless machinery yet in existence. It means
> that the age of revolutions free to evolve according to their own laws is
> over.”[^13]

We have got to remember that capital, as it constantly overthrows traditional
patterns of life, is itself revolution. This should lead us to think again
about the nature of revolution, and to realize that capital is able to take
control of social forces in order to overthrow the established order in
insurrections directed against the very society which it already
dominates.[^14] Never before have vision and understanding been more vitally
necessary; every separate revolt now becomes a further stimulus for the
movement of capital. But people have been robbed of their ability to think in
a theoretical way and to perceive reality as part of the outcome of an
historical process — this has happened as a result of the process of
domestication. And in a similar way, this capacity for theoretical thought has
been prevented from ever taking root in the material development of our planet
and in us as a species due to the existence of a split between the mind and
the body, and the old division between physical and intellectual work (which
automated systems are now in the process of surmounting to capital’s benefit).

Revolution can no longer be taken to mean just the destruction of all that is
old and conservative, because capital has accomplished this itself. Rather, it
will appear as a return to something (a revolution in the mathematical sense
of the term), a return to community, though not in any form which has existed
previously. Revolution will make itself felt in the destruction of all that
which is most “modern” and “progressive” (because science is capital). Another
of its manifestations will involve the reappropriation of all those aspects
and qualities of life which have still managed to affirm that which is human.
In attempting to grasp what this tendency means, we cannot be aided by any of
the old dualistic, manichean categories. (It is the same tendency which in the
past had held back the valorization process in its movement towards a
situation of complete autonomy.) If the triumph of communism is to bring about
the creation of humanity, then it requires that this creation be possible, it
must be a desire which has been there all the time, for centuries. Yet here
again nothing is easy, obvious, free from doubts, and indeed one could have
legitimate doubts about what it means to be human after the experience of
colonialism and Nazism, and then a second colonialism which strives to
maintain itself in spite of revolts in the oppressed countries (notorious
massacres and tortures having been committed by the British in Kenya, the
French in Algeria and the Americans in Vietnam), and in the face of the brutal
and deeprooted violence that everywhere continues to rage unchecked. Indeed,
could it be that humanity is too lost and sunk in its infernal wandering to
save itself?

## The Question of Violence

The movement which developed among the lycée students was an assertion of the
communist revolution in its human dimension. The students took up the question
of violence (though perhaps not in its full scope) in their refusal of the
army, refusal of military service and refusal of the universal right to kill.
By contrast, the groupscules of the left and extreme left, but not the
anarchists, preach about the necessity of learning to kill because they think
they can make death “rebound” on capital. But none of them (and this is
particularly true of the most extreme elements) ever take into account the
fact that they are suggesting the necessity of destroying human beings in
order to accomplish this revolution. How can you celebrate a revolution with a
rifle butt? To accept the army for one reason, whatever it may be, is to
strengthen the oppressive structure at every level. Any kind of argument on
this subject serves only to reinstate the despotism of repressive
consciousness, according to which people must repress the desire to not kill
because killing will be required of them at some stage in the future. (And
indeed some people are known to actually rejoice in this prospect). Repressive
consciousness forces me to be inhuman under the pretext that on a day decreed
by some theoretical destiny, I will at last metamorphosize into a human being.

> “[The various left and extreme left currents] try to ensure that there is no
> convergence between the “bourgeois” desire to see military service abolished
> and the libertarian pacifism which underlies conscientious objection,
> something that is always more or less latent among the young.” (T. Pfistner,
> Le Monde, 27 Mar ’73)

Violence is a fact of life in present day society; the question now is how
that violence can be destroyed. Revolution unleashes violence, but it has to
be under our control and direction; it cannot be allowed to operate blindly,
and it certainly cannot be glorified and widened in its field of action.
Statements like this may sound reasonable enough, but they aren’t particularly
helpful unless we go on to consider more precisely the actual nature of
violence, which is determined in the first instance by its object: thus
violence directed against the capitalist system should be praised and
encouraged, but not violence against people. But the capitalist system is
represented by people, and it is these people who will often be overtaken by
violence. This is where the question of the limitation of violence becomes
relevant; if it is not raised, we are still living according to the
prescriptions of capital. Granted that capital’s despotism is maintained
through generalized violence against people, it is also a fact that it can
only achieve this domination over people by first putting them in opposition
to one another and then allotting them different roles. When conflicts occur,
each side then represents the other as non-human (which is how the Americans
saw the Vietnamese). If human beings are to be destroyed, they must first be
despoiled of their humanity. And so if, during the revolutionary struggle
people choose to proceed according to this view, are they not simply imitating
the methods used by the capitalists, and thus furthering the destruction of
human beings?

So we might ask what the leftists are playing at when they theorize about the
destruction of the dominant class (rather than what supports it), or of the
cops (“the only good cop is a dead one”)? One can make the equation
CRS=SS[^15] on the level of a slogan, because that accurately represents the
reality of the two roles, but it does not justify the destruction of the
people involved — for two reasons. Firstly, it effectively rules out the
possibility of undermining the police force. When the police feel they are
reduced to the status of sub-humans, they themselves go into a kind of revolt
against the young people in order to affirm a humanity which is denied to
them, and in so doing they are therefore not simply playing the part of
killing/ repression machines. Secondly, every riot cop and every other kind of
cop is still a person. Each one is a person with a definite role like everyone
else. It is dangerous to delegate all inhumanity to one part of the social
whole, and all humanity to another. There is no question here of preaching
non-violence,[^16] but rather of defining precisely what violence must be
exercised and to what purpose. In this connection, the following points should
make the position clearer: firstly, all stereotypes and functions must be
revealed for what they are — roles imposed on us by capital; secondly, we must
reject the theory which postulates that all those individuals who defend
capital should simply be destroyed; thirdly, we cannot make exceptions on the
ground that certain people are not free, that it is “the system” which
produces both cops and revolutionaries alike. If this were correct, the
logical conclusion would be either a position of non-violence, or a situation
where human beings become reduced to automatons which would then justify every
kind of violence against them. If right from the outset certain people are
denied all possibility of humanity, how can they subsequently be expected to
emerge as real human beings? So it is as human beings that they must be
confronted. Now though the majority of people think in terms of the radical
solution provided by class society — i.e., repress your opponents — even in
this form the revolution would assert itself according to its true nature,
namely that it is human. When the conflict comes, as it inevitably will, there
should be no attempt to reduce the various individuals who defend capital to
the level of “bestial” or mechanical adversaries; they have to be put in the
context of their humanity, for humanity is what they too know they are a part
of and are potentially able to find again. In this sense the conflict takes on
intellectual and spiritual dimensions. The representations which justify an
individual person’s defence of capital must be revealed and demystified;
people in this situation must become aware of contradiction, and doubts should
arise in their minds.

Terrorism also has to be viewed in this perspective. It is not sufficient just
to denounce it as abhorrent. Those who accept terrorism have capitulated
before the power of capital. Terrorism is concerned with more than just the
destruction of some people: it is also an appeal to death in order to raise up
a hypothetical revolt. That aspect should be fairly noted, without
condemnation or approval, but it must be rejected as a plan of action.
Terrorism implies that the “wall” (the proletariat and its representation) is
an impassable and indestructible barrier. Terrorism has admitted defeat, and
all the recent examples of it are sufficient proof of this.

We must recognize that the crushing domination of capital affects everyone
without exception. Particular groupings cannot be designated as “the elect”,
exempt from and unmarked by capital’s despotism. The revolutionary struggle is
a human struggle, and it must recognize in every person the possibility of
humanity. Amid the conflict with the racketeers in their groupscules, the
“capitalists” and the police in all their forms, each individual must be
violent with him/herself in order to reject, as outside themselves the
domestication of capital and all its comfortable self-validating
“explanations”.

## The Terrain of Struggle

None of this can take on its full meaning unless there is a simultaneous
refusal of all obsolete forms of struggle. Like the May ’68 movement but more
so, the lycée movement emphasized very clearly that staying within the old
forms of struggle inevitably leads to certain defeat. It is now becoming
generally accepted that demonstrations, marches, spectacles and shows don’t
lead anywhere. Waving banners, putting up posters, handing out leaflets,
attacking the police are all activities which perpetuate a certain ritual — a
ritual wherein the police are always cast in the role of invincible
subjugators. The methods of struggle therefore must be put through a thorough
analysis because they present an obstacle to the creation of new modes of
action. And for this to be effective, there has to be a refusal of the old
terrain of struggle — both in the workplace and in the streets. As long as
revolutionary struggle is conducted not on its own ground but on the terrain
of capital, there can be no significant breakthrough, no qualitative
revolutionary leap. This is where we must concentrate our attention; it is a
question which has to be faced now if revolution is not to stagnate and
destroy itself, a setback which could take years to recover from. If we are to
successfully abandon the old centres of struggle, it will require a
simultaneous movement towards the creation of new modes of life. What’s the
point of occupying the factories — like car factories for example — where
production must be stopped anyway? The cry goes up: “Occupy the factories and
manage them ourselves !” So all the prisoners of the system are supposed to
take over their prisons and begin the self-management of their own
imprisonment. A new social form is not founded on the old, and only rarely in
the past do we find civilizations superimposed on one another. The bourgeoisie
triumphed because it staged the battle on its own terrain, which is the
cities. But in our present situation this can only be helpful to the emergence
of communism which is neither a new society nor a new mode of production.
Today humanity can launch its battle against capital not in the city, nor in
the countryside, but outside of both:[^17] hence the necessity for communist
forms to appear which will be truly antagonistic to capital, and also rallying
points for the forces of revolution. Since the advent of May ’68, capital has
been obliged to take account of the fact that revolution had presented itself
again as a vital imperative, a necessity. In response, the counter-revolution
was compelled to adapt and remodel itself (remembering that it has no
existence except in relation to revolution). But however much it tries by its
usual methods to limit the development of its adversary, it can never totally
succeed, because revolution will always present itself as real, and therefore
as irrational. This irrationality is its fundamental characteristic. Whatever
is rational in relation to the established order can be absorbed and
recuperated. If revolution operates on the same terrain as its adversary, it
can always be halted. It cannot rise up; it is thwarted in its most passionate
desire, which is to realize its own project and to accomplish it on its own
ground.

The attaining of a human community must be the goal towards which revolution
moves. The revolutionary movement must therefore reflect within itself the
same purpose and aim. The methods provided by class society lead us away from
this goal; by their very nature they are inhuman, and it is therefore not
possible to use them. Thus it is absurd to want to penetrate the structures of
the established order to make them function in the interests of the
revolutionary movement. Those who operate in this way are labouring under the
mystification that the historical project approaches its truth and its end in
capital. That mystification which presents the human being as inessential, not
determinant, and useless has to be exposed. In the capitalist system humans
have in effect become superfluous, but to the extent that humanity has
preserved an unbroken human consistency from its earliest origins, it cannot
be said to have been destroyed as long as the idea of revolt remains alive,
and provided also that young people are not totally immobilized by
domestication. All is still possible. In every case, struggle tends to revive
the human essence which is preserved in each individual; struggle takes us out
of the trap of perceiving others only as their reified outward appearance.
Even where an individual has attained a high degree of reification and been
transformed into an organic automaton of capital, there is still the
possibility that the whole construction could break apart. Here we would do
well to follow an old piece of advice from Marx: It’s not enough to make the
chains visible, they must become shameful. Each individual should experience a
crisis. In conflicts with the police, the impulse should be not only to
eliminate a repressive force which presents an obstacle to the communist
movement but also to bring down the system, provoking in the minds of the
police a sense of human resurgence.

This can never happen if the old methods of direct confrontation continue to
be used; we have got to find new methods, such as treating all institutions
with contempt and ridicule[^18] by leaving them trapped and isolated in their
own concerns. It would be absurd to theorize and make generalizations about
this. But we can be certain of one thing: it has proved effective in the past,
and it will be again, but we must invent a host of other different modes of
action. The essential point is to understand that the terrain and methods of
struggle must be changed; this necessity has been understood in a limited and
sometimes negative way by people who abandon everything and go on the roads,
expressing their desire to leave the vicious circle of struggles that go on in
the day-to-day world.

The leftists persist in their well known cycle of
provocation-repression-subversion which is all supposed to bring about
revolution at some precise time in the future. But this conception of
revolution is totally inadmissible because it means sacrificing men and women
in order to mobilize others. Communist revolution does not demand martyrs
because it does not need to make any demands. The martyr becomes the bait
which attracts the followers. What would then be the use of a revolution that
uses death as a bait in this way?[^19] But then there is always someone who
dies at just the right time (or the victim’s demise may even be
“facilitated”), and someone else goes around shaking the cadaver in order to
attract the revolutionary flies.

Since the communist revolution is the triumph of life, it cannot in any way
glorify death, or seek to exploit it, since this would be putting itself once
more on the terrain of class society. There are some who would compare or
substitute “those who fell in the revolution” with those who died in the
service of capital: but it’s all just the same old carnival of carrion !

Revolution is never presented as having the scope of a necessary and also a
naturally occurring phenomenon, and this misunderstanding has serious
consequences. It always seems that revolution depends strictly on some group
or other radiating true consciousness. We are faced today with the following
alternatives: either there is actual revolution — the whole process, from the
formation of revolutionaries to the destruction of the capitalist mode of
production — or there is destruction, under one form or another of the human
species. There is no other possibility. When revolution is unleashed there
will be no need to justify what is happening; rather it will be a question of
being powerful enough to avoid abuses and excesses. And this is possible only
if individual men and women, before the revolutionary explosion, begin to be
autonomous: since they don’t need any leaders, they can gain mastery over
their own revolt.

Obviously in the present circumstances people can only go so far in this
direction; but the only way it has a chance of true realization is by
rejecting that cannibalistic discourse which presents revolution as a settling
of scores, as a physical extermination of one class or group of people by
another. If communism really is a necessity for the human species, it has no
need of such methods to impose itself.

In general, most revolutionaries doubt that revolution will ever come about,
but in order to convince themselves that it will, they have to justify it to
themselves in some way. This allows them to deal with the waiting, but it also
masks the fact that most of the time manifestations of real revolution pass
them by. To exorcise their doubt they resort to verbal violence (again a
substitute), and are constantly engaged in desperate and obstinate
proselytizing. The justification process works like this: as soon as they’ve
made some recruits, this is taken as proof that the situation is favourable,
and so the level of agitation must be stepped up, and so on and so on.
According to this scheme of things, revolution means agitation which means
bringing consciousness from outside. They haven’t yet grasped the fact that
revolution is accomplished precisely when there is no one left to defend the
old order; revolution triumphs because there are no more adversaries. The
point is that everything is going to be different afterwards, which is where
the problem of violence again becomes relevant. The necessity for communism is
a necessity which extends to all people. During the ferment of revolution this
is a truth which will become evident in a more or less confused way. It does
not mean that people will somehow be rid of all the old rubbish of the
previous society overnight. It means that those who will be making the
revolution will be people of the right as well as the left; thus when the
superstructural elements of the capitalist system are destroyed and the global
process of production halted, the presuppositions of capital will remain
intact, and the old forms of behaviour and the old schemas will tend to
reappear because it seems that each time humanity embarks on a new
opportunity, a creation, it tends to wrap it up in the forms of the past and
readapt it to the times. Certainly, the communist revolution will not develop
in the same way as previous revolutions, but if its scope is limited to any
degree, it will nonetheless still be part of the content of the
post-revolutionary movement. The movement will tend to give new dimensions to
the human community, reaffirming and strengthening what will have emerged
during the course of revolution. It is at this stage, when things are
difficult, that the old institutional forms can reappear, and some elements
may want to reassert their privileges in a disguised form, and try to make
solutions prevail that favour them. Others might want to reintroduce
self-management. They still will not have understood that communism is not a
mode of production, but a new mode of being.

This is also the time when the old practice of categorizing everything, so
characteristic of all rackets, must bp eliminated once and for all. We have to
understand that new things can spring up draped in the mantle of the past; it
would be a major error to consider only these superficial semblances of the
past to the exclusion of everything else. It’s not a question of seeing the
postrevolutionary movement as the apotheosis of immediate reconciliation, when
by some miracle the oppressiveness of the past will abolish itself. Granted
that the new mode of being will generate itself through effective struggle,
the issue then becomes the modality of that struggle. Any sectarian or
inquisitional spirit is lethal to the revolution — which is all the more
reason why the classical dictatorship is out of the question, since this would
mean re-establishing a mode of being which is intrinsic to class society. The
period of intermediate change cannot be transcended except through a diverse
expression of liberation by multifarious human beings. This is the pressure
which communism brings to bear. It is a pressure exerted by the great majority
of human beings seeking to create the human community which will allow and
enable them to remove all obstacles barring their way. This affirmation of
life is what Marx had in mind when he said “if we assume man to be man, and
his relation to the world to be a human one, then love can be exchanged only
for love, trust for trust…” Violent clashes can only be exceptional.

Those who believe that what is required is a dictatorship have already
conceded in their minds that human society will never be ready to grow towards
communism. It is a long, painful and difficult road to that extraordinary
realization that the mystification no longer holds, that the wandering of
humanity was leading to its own destruction, and that this was largely due to
the fact that it had entrusted its destiny to the monstrous, autonomized
system of capital.[^20] Men and women will come to realize that they
themselves are the determining elements, and that they do not have to abdicate
their power to the machine, and alienate their being in the false belief that
this will lead to happiness.

The moment this point is reached, it’s all over, and going back will be
impossible. The entire representation of capital All collapse like a house of
cards. People whose minds are free from capital will be able to find
themselves and their fellow creatures as well. From this time onwards, the
creation of a human community can no longer be halted.

Ideology, science, art and the rest, through the entire range of institutions
and organizations act together to instill the belief that human beings are
inessential and powerless to act.[^21] More than this, they all enforce the
idea that if we seem to have arrived at a particular stage of social
evolution, it is because it could not have been otherwise from the very
beginning when we first appropriated and developed technology. There is a
certain fatality which surrounds technology: if we do not embrace it, we
cannot progress. All we can do is remedy certain shortcomings, but we cannot
escape the workings of the machine, which is this society itself. The trap has
been closed, people have been immobilized, and the determining factor here is
the representation of capital — it represents itself (i.e. capital) as a
rational social process, which gives rise to the feeling that the system can
no longer be perceived as oppressive. In order to explain any negative
aspects, capital simply invokes categories designated as “outside of capital”.

The long habit of mind which has allowed human intelligence to be a host for
the parasitical representation of capital has to be broken down. The mentality
and behaviour of the servant (whose master is capital) must be eradicated.
This need is now all the more urgent as the old dialectic of master and slave
is tending to disappear in the process whereby even the slave — the human
being — is becoming redundant.

## The Global Perspective

The struggle against domestication has to be understood at the global level
where important forces are also beginning to emerge. The a priori universal
rationality of capitalism can be demystified only when we begin to seriously
question the unilinear scheme of human evolution and also the notion that the
capitalist mode of production has been progressive for all countries.

Those particular countries which according to the prophets of growth and the
“economic miracle” are underdeveloped or on the road to development are really
countries where the capitalist mode of production has failed to establish
itself. In Asia, South America, and Africa there are millions of people who
have not yet fully succumbed to the despotism of capital. Their resistance is
usually negative in the sense that they are unable to pose for themselves
another community. It is therefore essential to maintain a world wide network
of human debate which only the communist revolution can transform into a
movement for the establishing of a new community. Moreover, during the
revolutionary explosion this network or pole will have a determining influence
in the work of destroying capital.

In those countries labelled as underdeveloped, the youth have risen up (in
Ceylon, in Madagascar in 1972, and less strongly in Senegal, Tunisia, Zaire
etc…), and expressed in different ways the same need and necessity that is
felt in the West. For over ten years the insurrection of youth has
demonstrated that its fundamental characteristic is that of
anti-domestication. Without wanting to prophesy any certain outcome, it is
important to try to discern in this some kind of perspective. In May ’68 we
again took up Bordiga’s forecast about a revival of the revolutionary movement
around 1968, and revolution for the period 1975–1980. This is a “prediction”
we remain attached to. Recent political/social and economic events confirm it,
and the same conclusion is being arrived at by various writers. The capitalist
mode of production finds itself in a crisis which is shaking it from its
highest to its lowest levels. It is not a 1929-style crisis, though certain
aspects of that crisis can reappear; rather it is a crisis of profound
transformation. Capital must restructure itself in order to be able to slow
down the destructive consequences of its global process of production. The
whole debate about growth shows very clearly that this concern is real. The
experts think they can simply draw attention to the movement of capital and
proclaim that there must be slackening off, a slowing down. But capital in its
turn can only break free from people’s opposition by perfecting its domination
over them at an ever higher level. It is a domination which extends to the
horizon of our lives, but young people are rising up against it in a vast
movement, and a growing number of older people are beginning to understand and
support them.

The revolutionary resurgence is evident everywhere except in one enormous
country, the USSR, which could quite easily end up playing an inhibiting role,
putting a strong brake on the revolution (in which case our previous forecast
would be consigned to the limbo of pious wish fulfilment). But events in
Czechoslovakia and Poland and the constant strengthening of despotism in the
Soviet republic are an indication (though a negative one) that subversion, of
which we hear only faint echoes, is by no means absent there. Repression in
the USSR needs to be more violent in order to prevent insurrection
generalizing. On the other hand, the process of destalinization is taking on
the same role (taking into account considerable historical differences) as the
revolt of the nobles in 1825, which made way for the revolt of the
intelligentsia and subsequently gave strength to the whole populist movement.
This idea leads us to think that there exists at the present moment subversion
sufficient to go well beyond the democratic opposition expressed by the
dissident academician Sakharov. Certain other historical constants must be
kept in mind: for example, generalized revolutionary action appeared in its
most radical form in France and Russia, while actually having its origins in
other countries. The French revolution subsequently spread the bourgeois
revolution throughout Europe. The Russian revolution generalized a double
revolution — proletarian and bourgeois — which resulted in the final triumph
of the capitalist revolution. The student revolt did not originate in France
yet it was there that the revolt was felt most sharply; it was capable of
shaking capitalist society, and the consequences of it are still being felt.
There can be no revolutionary upheaval in the USSR while the consequences of
1917 — the wave of anti-colonial revolutions — are still to be played out. The
most important of these has been the case of China, and now that the Chinese
revolution has come to the end of its cycle, we will see in the USSR the
beginning of a new revolutionary cycle.

The important historic shift between the French and the Russian revolutions is
present also in the rise of the new revolutionary cycle. The despotism of
capital today is more powerful than that which prevailed under the Czar, and
there is also the fact that the holy alliance between the USSR and the USA has
been shown to be more effective than the Anglo-Russian alliance of the
nineteenth century. The outcome can be delayed but not halted: we can expect
the “communitarian” dimension of revolution in the USSR to be clearer there
than in the West, and that it will go forward with giant strides.

## Revolution and the Future

During a period of total counter-revolution, Bordiga was able to withstand the
disintegrating effect brought about by it because he retained a vision of the
coming revolution, but more particularly because he shifted his focus of
thinking concerning struggle. He did not look only to the past, which is just
a dead weight in such a period, nor did he incline towards the present,
dominated as it was by the established order, but towards the future.[^22]

Being thus attuned to the future enabled him to perceive the revolutionary
movement as it actually was, and not according to its own characterizations.
Since that time, the “future industry”[^23] has come into its own and assumed
an enormous scope. Capital enters this new field and begins to exploit it,
which leads to a further expropriation of people, and a reinforcement of their
domestication. This hold over the future is what distinguishes capital from
all other modes of production. From its earliest origins capital’s
relationship to the past or present has always been of less importance to it
than its relationship to the future. Capital’s only lifeblood is in the
exchange it conducts with labour power. Thus when surplus value is created, it
is, in the immediate sense, only potential capital; it can become effective
capital solely through an exchange against future labour. In other words, when
surplus value is created in the present, it acquires reality only if labour
power can appear to be ready and available in a future (a future which can
only be hypothetical, and not necessarily very near). If therefore this future
isn’t there, then the present (or henceforth the past) is abolished: this is
devalorization through total loss of substance. Clearly then capital’s first
undertaking must be to dominate the future in order to be assured of
accomplishing its production process. (This conquest is managed by the credit
system). Thus capital has effectively appropriated time, which it moulds in
its own image as quantitative time. However, present surplus value was
realized and valorized through exchange against future labour, but now, with
the development of the “future industry”, present surplus value has itself
become open to capitalization. This capitalization demands that time be
programmed, and this need expresses itself in a scientific fashion in
futurology. Henceforth, capital produces time.[^24] From now on where may
people situate their utopias and uchronias?

The established societies that existed in previous times dominated the present
and to a lesser extent the past, while the revolutionary movement had for
itself the future. Bourgeois revolutions and proletarian revolutions have had
to guarantee progress, but this progress depended on the existence of a future
valorized in relation to a present and a past which is to be abolished. In
each case, and to a degree which is more or less pronounced depending on which
type of revolution is being considered, the past is presented as shrouded in
darkness, while the future is all shining light. Capital has conquered the
future. Capital has no fear of utopias, since it even tends to produce them.
The future is a field for the production of profit. In order to generate the
future, to bring it into being, people must now be conditioned as a function
of a strictly preconceived process of production: this is programming brought
to its highest point. Man, once characterized by Marx as “the carcass of time”
is now excluded from time. This, together with the domination of the past, the
present and the future, gives rise to a structural representation, where
everything is reduced to a combinative of social relations, productive forces,
or mythèmes etc., arranged in such a way as to cohere as a totality.
Structure, perfecting itself, eliminates history. But history is what people
have made.

This leads to the understanding that revolution must not only engender another
conception of time, but must also assimilate it to a new synthesis of space.
Both will be created simultaneously as they emerge out of the new relationship
between human beings and nature: reconciliation. We said before that all which
is fragmented is grist to the mill of the counter-revolution. But revolution
means more than reclaiming just the totality; it is the reintegration of all
that was separate, a coming together of future being, individuality and
Gemeinwesen. This future being already exists as a total and passionately felt
need; it expresses better than anything else the true revolutionary character
of the May ’68 movement and that of the lycée students in Spring 1973.

Revolutionary struggle is struggle against domination as it appears in all
times and places, and in all the different aspects of life. For five years
this contestation has invaded every department of the life of capital.
Revolution is now able to pose its true terrain of struggle, whose centre is
everywhere, but whose place is nowhere.[^25] Its task in this sense is
infinite: to destroy domestication and engender the infinite manifestation of
the human being of the future. We have a feeling, which is founded on more
than just optimism, that the next five years will see the beginning of
revolution, and the destruction of the capitalist mode of production.[^26]

It seems that every current or group which opposes capital is nonetheless
obliged to focus always on the human as the basis of everything. It takes
diverse forms, but it has a profoundly consistent basis and is surprisingly
uniform wherever human populations are found. Thus by seeking to restore (and
install) the volksgemeinschaft, even the Nazis represent an attempt to create
such a community (cf. also their ideology of the Urmensh, the “original man”).
We believe that the phenomenon of Nazism is widely misunderstood: it is seen
by many people only as a demonic expression of totalitarianism. But the Nazis
in Germany had reintroduced an old theme originally theorized by German
sociologists like Tonnies and Max Weber. And so in response, we find the
Frankfurt school, and most notably Adorno, dealing in empty and sterile
concepts of “democracy”, due to their incapacity to understand the phenomenon
of Nazism. They have been unable to grasp Marx’s great insight, which was that
he posed the necessity of reforming the community, and that he recognised that
this reformation must involve the whole of humanity. The problems are there
for everybody; they are serious, and they urgently require solutions. People
try to work them out from diverse political angles. However, it is not these
problems which determine what is revolutionary or counter-revolutionary, but
the solutions put forward — i.e. are they effective or not? And here the
racketeer’s mentality descends upon us once again: each gang of the left or
the right carves out its own intellectual territory; anyone straying into one
or the other of these territories is automatically branded as a member of the
relevant controlling gang. Thus we have reification: the object is
determinant, the subject passive.

[^1]: What we call the monetary crisis involves more than just determining the
    price of gold or redefining its role; nor is it merely a question of
    establishing a new general equivalent (a new standard altogether), or
    setting fixed parities among national currencies, or integrating the
    economies of the money markets (capital as totality — Marx). The monetary
    crisis is about the role of capital in its money form, or, more precisely,
    the superseding of the money form itself, just as there has been a
    supercession of the commodity form.

[^2]: Worse than the “heartless world” Marx speaks of in The Critique of
    Hegel’s Philosophy of Right.

[^3]: The presupposition underlying such an absurd demand is the supposed
    biological inferiority of women, which is a scientific illusion. Science
    has discovered a defect in women and decrees that it is up to science to
    remedy it. If men are no longer needed (because of parthenogenesis) and if
    women aren’t needed either (since embryos and even ovaries may be
    developed in phials), then we are left with the question of whether there
    is any need for the human species after all. Has it not become redundant?
    These people seem to believe in solving everything by mutilation. Why not
    do away with pain by eliminating the organs of sensitivity? Social and
    human problems cannot be solved by science and technology. Their only
    effect when used is to render humanity even more superfluous. Obviously,
    no one can make a judgement about the feminist movement as a whole just by
    reference to that aspect now being discussed. The feminist movement is of
    great importance in the struggle against capital, and it is a subject we
    hope to take up on in the future. In its critique of capitalist society
    and the traditional revolutionary movement, it has made a remarkable
    contribution..

[^4]: In the original French the author frequently uses the expressions “men”,
    “man”, or “mankind”, as well as “humans”, or “human beings”. Where the
    false generic “man” etc. does occur it has been changed, even though this
    must involve a distortion of what was originally intended. [translator’s
    note]

[^5]: The struggle of people against capital has only ever been seen through
    the narrow focus of class. The only way to be regarded as a real adversary
    of capital has been to actively identify oneself with the proletariat; all
    else is romantic, petit bourgeois etc … But the very act of reasoning in
    classist terms means that any particular class is confined within the
    limits of class analysis. This is particularly important when one
    considers that the working class has as its mission the elimination of all
    classes. It also avoids the question of how that class will bring about
    its own autodestruction, since this classist analysis prevents any lessons
    being drawn from the tragic intellectual fate of those people who set
    themselves in opposition to capital without even recognising or
    identifying their enemy (as with Bergson, for example). Today, when the
    whole classist approach has been deprived of any solid base, it may be
    worthwhile to reconsider movements of the right and their thinking. The
    right is a movement of opposition to capital that seeks to restore a
    moment which is firmly rooted in the past. Hence in order to eliminate
    class conflict, the excesses of capitalist individualism, speculation and
    so on, the Action Francaise and the Nouvelle Action Francaise (NAF)
    envisage a community which can only be guaranteed, according to them, by a
    system of monarchy. (See particularly the chapter on capitalism in Les
    Dossiers de l’Action Francaise).

[^6]: We are speaking here of technicians, intellectuals, politicians and
    economists, like the members of the Club of Rome, Mansholt, Dumont,
    Laborit etc.

[^7]: Human beings are not constantly immersed in nature; existence is not
    always at one with essence, nor being with consciousness, and so on. This
    separation brings into being the need for representation. Once time is
    perceived as irreversible, the subject of the past is seen as distinct
    from the subject of the present, and thus memory begins to assume a
    determining role. It is here that representation interposes itself in
    order to provide a mediation. From such an understanding, the way is open
    to a re-examination of philosophy and science, a task which will have to
    be undertaken someday. Perhaps some readers may have been drawn to similar
    ideas (which are actually different because they leave aside the
    importance of representation in social contexts) in the work of Cardan and
    the social-imaginary, the situationists and the spectacle, and in the area
    of scholarship, Foucault’s analysis of representation in the sixteenth
    century (which we took up in a study of the democratic mystification). We
    would like to clarify our own position on this: we employ the term
    “representation” in the same way as Marx did (vorstellung) in order to
    indicate, for example, that value must be represented in a price. In “A
    propos du capital” (Invariance ser. III, no. 1), we discussed very briefly
    the way capital becomes representation, which then becomes autonomous, and
    how it can then only exist through being accepted and recognized by
    everyone as real. This is why people have now had to interiorize the
    representation of capital. This whole question of representation is a very
    important one. From the moment when human beings and nature no longer
    exist together in an immediate unity (leaving aside for the moment the
    question of whether an “immediate unity” could ever have been possible),
    representation becomes necessary. Representation is the human
    appropriation of reality and our means of communication, and in this sense
    it can never be abolished: human beings cannot exist in an
    undifferentiated union with nature. The point is that representation must
    not be allowed to become autonomous, another expression of alienation.

[^8]: See the chapter “Growth of Productive Forces: Domestication of Human
    Beings” in Camatte: The Wandering of Humanity (Detroit, 1975). That work
    also contains a more detailed discussion of other matters raised in the
    present article, e.g. the Marxist theory of the proletariat, repressive
    consciousness etc. [translator’s note]

[^9]: This point was made clear by Norman 0. Brown in Eros and Thanatos. The
    fear of individuality cannot by itself adequately explain the profound
    phenomenon whereby human beings are pressed into a mould, obliged to
    identify themselves as a certain type of being and forced to submerge
    themselves within a group. People are afraid of themselves because they
    don’t know themselves. Hence there is this need for a norm in order to be
    able to ward off the “excesses” which can afflict the social order as well
    as the individual heart. It would seem that the organizations within
    society are too fragile to allow the free development of human
    potentialities. With the capitalist mode of production everything is
    possible as an element of capitalization, but what is possible is all the
    time only what is permitted; this means that the individual is reduced to
    a modality of being that is either normal or abnormal; the totality
    meanwhile exists only within the discourse of capital, where it remains
    perverted and beyond reach. The fear of individuality comes through very
    clearly in most of the utopias which depict the triumph of a despotic and
    egalitarian rationality.

[^10]: The abbreviations refer to the Communist Party, the Socialist Party,
    the United Socialist Party and the two big labour confederations: CGT
    (Communist) and the CFDT (“independent” left). The agitation in the lycées
    emerged openly on 22 March when 30,000 young people demonstrated in Paris
    against the Debré law which provided for 15 months military service
    (previously two years) for all 18 year olds, but with no deferment beyond
    the age of 21. During the first part of April there were more large
    demonstrations in Paris (one of them numbering 100,000 according to The
    Times, 10 Apr 73) and in many other cities in France and also Strasbourg.
    Strike Committees were formed in the lycées and general assemblies were
    set up. These were often controlled by political militants (usually
    belonging to the trotskyist organizations, La Ligue Communiste
    Révolutionnaire and L’Alliance Marxiste; the young Communists stayed with
    the existing student organisations), and these leaders succeeded, against
    some considerable opposition, in forging contacts with the trade unions
    which had earlier issued long declarations of support for the striking
    lycéens. This led to the “unitary” demonstrations of 9 April where leaders
    of the CGT etc. marched at the head of the columns. [translator’s note]

[^11]: In 1964 Cardan saw that youth insurrections were very important, but he
    viewed them as something exterior which had to be made use of. This is the
    tribute which ideology pays to the old idea of consciousness coming from
    outside: “The revolutionary movement will be able to give a positive
    direction to todays enormous youth revolt. If it can discover that new and
    true language which the youth is looking for, it can turn their revolt
    into a ferment of social transformation, and show them another activity
    for their struggle against the world which they now refuse.” Socialisme ou
    Barbarie No. 35, p. 35

[^12]: On the subject of the army, we would insist that those arguments which
    attempt to distinguish between the volunteer, professional army and the
    conscript or national army are a fraud, an absurd blackmail. If you end
    military service, you are still left with a professional army, a
    praetorian guard and the possibility of a fascist revival. (Certain
    leftist groups “intervened” during the agitation in 1973 demanding
    democratic and popular control of the national army [translator’s note]).
    In practice, the present system in France is a mixture: a professional
    army which educates and trains the intake who then go to make up the
    national army. And where did this national army, much vaunted by Jaurés
    come from? — the union sacrée of 1914, the sacred slaughter which is
    venerated to this day. There is a book called l’Armée Nouvelle (publisher
    10/18) which demonstrates the extent to which “fascism” had no need to
    invent a fresh theory in this area, since one had already been provided by
    the social democratic International. Jaurés wanted to reconcile army and
    nation (which is exactly what Hitler wanted and managed to achieve.) The
    reconciliation was accomplished in 1914 when the brave Frenchmen gaily set
    out for the slaughter. How different it all was from Jaurés’ cult of la
    patrie. “It was rooted in the very foundations of human life, and even, if
    we can put it this way, in people’s physiology” (l’Armée Nouvelle, p.268).
    And in Germany, at about the same time, Bebel was thinking along similar
    lines.

[^13]: Cited in Noam Chomsky: American Power and the New Mandarins (Pelican,
    1969) p. 247.

[^14]: The Asiatic mode of production experienced quite a number of very
    extensive insurrectional movements which effectively regenerated it.
    According to a number of historians, some revolts were even raised up by
    the state itself Mao’s great cultural revolution is only a replay of such
    revolts. These facts confirm the thesis we have advanced many times before
    about the, convergence between the Asiatic mode of production where
    classes could never become autonomous, and the capitalist mode where they
    are absorbed.

[^15]: The CRS are the para-military riot police. In May 1979 a new variation
    on the old slogan appeared when the trotskyists of the Ligue Communiste
    Révolutionaire (LCR) joined forces with the stalinists and the CRS in the
    violent repression directed against the “autonomes” during the
    demonstrations in Paris by the steel workers from Longwy and Denain:
    LCR=CRS, or LCRS. [translator’s note]

[^16]: Non-violence is itself just an insidious hypocritical form of violence,
    a sign of certain people’s inability to stand up for themselves as human
    beings.

[^17]: The old opposition between city and country clearly no longer exists.
    Capital has urbanized the planet; Nature has become mineralized (made
    inorganic). We are now seeing new conflicts between urban centres and
    those parts of the countryside where a few peasants still remain. Urban
    centres demand more and more water which means building numerous
    reservoirs at distances of fifty or even a hundred miles from the city.
    This leads to the destruction of good agricultural land as well as land
    for hunting and fishing; it also results in the peasants being deprived of
    water since all the sources are drawn off to fill reservoirs and channels.
    This conflict can affect the same person from two angles if he/she lives
    in the town and owns a second “house in the country”. We can see now that
    the problem extends well beyond the question of the traditional peasantry;
    it now involves the global relationship of people to the natural world and
    a reconsideration of their actual mode of being.

[^18]: Which is how one would have to regard the actions of those American
    psychiatrists who voluntarily commit themselves to psychiatric clinics,
    thereby demonstrating the there is no system of knowledge capable of
    defining madness. (We might add that the production of actual madness is
    necessary to the existence of capital).

[^19]: Death has become an essential element in people’s coming to
    consciousness of themselves, but such consciousness is transmitted only
    with great difficulty. The passage from the exterior to the interior is
    too laborious, but fortunately the expedients and shortcuts are there.

[^20]: A process described as “prosthesis” by Cesarano and Collu in Apocalisse
    et Rivoluzione (Dedalo, Bari, 1973). The book presents itself as “a
    manifesto for biological revolution” and no resumé could do justice to its
    great richness of thought. (The authors also take up the question of
    representation and symbolism in social relations. See note 7). Here are
    two passages which give a small insight into their position: The
    progressive thinkers who produced the MIT report (Man’s Impact on the
    Global Environment, 1972) and also the propositions put forward by
    Mansholt all suggest that capital cannot survive unless it continually
    increases the volume of commodity production (the basis of its
    valorization process). But they are mistaken in this if their
    understanding of commodity is restricted to things. It doesn’t matter
    whether the commodity form is a thing or “a person”. In order for capital
    to continue its growth it requires only this: that within the process of
    circulation there must be a moment when one commodity of whatever kind
    assumes the task of exchanging itself for A in order to subsequently
    exchange itself with X. In theory this is perfectly possible, provided
    that constant capital, instead of being invested mainly in projects to
    manufacture objects, is devoted to projects designed to create corporate
    people (“social services”, “personnel services”). (p. 82) Fiction (le
    fictif) reaches its final peak of coher ence when it is able to present
    itself as a complete representation and hence as an organization of
    appearances which is completely unreal; ultimately it is able to separate
    itself definitively from the concrete, to such a degree that it disappears
    altogether. (Thus fiction is the essence of all religions). The human
    species will be able to emancipate itself definitively from prosthesis and
    free itself from fiction and religion only when it openly recognizes
    itself as subjectively acting as an indissoluble part of the organic
    movement of nature in its global process. Biological revolution consists
    in reversing once and for all the relationship which has been a feature of
    all prehistory (i.e. all the period preceding the communist revolution),
    whereby the physical existence of the species is subordinated to the role
    of the social mechanism; it is the emancipation of organic subjectivity,
    the taming of the machine once and for all in whatever form it may appear.
    (p. 153)

[^21]: We are referring here not to the human being as an individual existing
    in a particular historical period, but as an invariant constant.

[^22]: Bordiga once maintained that “we are the only ones to ground our action
    in the future”. In 1952 he wrote: “Our strength lies more in the science
    of the future than in that of the past or present.” (“Explorateurs de
    l’avenir”, Battaglia Communista no. 6)

[^23]: “L’industrie du futur” e.g. futurology, the technological revolution,
    marketing, resources planning, space exploration etc. [translator’s note]

[^24]: Capital is characterized not so much by the way it emphasizes quantity
    while denying quality, but rather by the fact that there exists a
    fundamental contradiction between the two, with the quantitative tending
    to overwhelm all aspects of quality. It is not a question of realizing the
    desire for quality by denying quantity (in the same way, one does not
    arrive at use value by suppressing exchange value). It will require a
    total mutation before all the logic of this domination can be swept away.
    For quality and quantity both exist in close affinity with measurement,
    and all are in turn linked to value. Measurement operates to an equal
    degree at the level of use value, as well as exchange value. In the former
    case, it is closely bound up with one type of domination: use values
    measure a particular person’s social position, and are also a measure of
    the weight of oppression they bear. Use values impose their own despotism
    which envelops the other despotism (exchange value), and now also that of
    capital. Marx, in his notes to J.S.Mill’s work, denounced utilitarianism
    as a philosophy in which man is valued only in terms of his use, while
    exchange tends to autonomize itself.

[^25]: This is Blanqui’s definition of infinity which is itself a slight
    modification of Pascal’s famous phrase. (The French is: “le centre est
    partout, la surface nulle part” — translator’s note)

[^26]:
    > “From our present point of view, this prediction seems to be wrong. But
    > we should bear in mind that predictions can never be made with absolute
    > accuracy; the overall process will generally tend to lag behind what we
    > forecast will happen, and there is also the factor that every such
    > prediction is an expression of a particular individual’s, own profound
    > desire. And desire is always in a hurry, it doesn’t know how to wait.
    >
    > We should discuss the future realistically: i.e. in terms of the
    > movement and process towards revolution, and from the standpoint that we
    > must abandon this world. But it cannot be stated as simply as that; it
    > starts to look like equivocation. We ought to be able now to examine the
    > forecast we made and what emerges from it. What is true about it is the
    > fact that in 1978, the refusal we have often spoken about is now more
    > manifest, more definitely present than it has been in the years
    > preceding. This refusal moreover, is heavy with consequences for
    > capital’s destruction.
    >
    > What we have said so far has been concerned with the permanent element
    > of the perspective, but it doesn’t clarify particularly the situation at
    > the present, where we find that the concern is no longer with a struggle
    > against capital as such. In 1973, one could already see that the
    > destruction aimed at capital was indirect: it did not come from men and
    > women forming a frontal opposition against it. If the system suffers
    > from instability — the ‘crisis’ as the economists now call it — this
    > doesn’t of itself call capital into question, and the catastrophe is
    > only just beginning to develop its premises (though the pace of events
    > can accelerate quickly).
    >
    > One fundamental thing to emerge since 1978 is the fact that we are fast
    > approaching the end of the cycle of capital. It is more intensive now,
    > but also more extensive, and from either point of view this makes it
    > easier for us to abandon capital. Taking up a position about something
    > that is already achieved and finished is easy; it is much harder with
    > something that is still in the process of formation and development.
    >
    > (from *la separation necessaire et l’immense refus*, 1979)

    This is as clear as I was able to get it in January 1979 when that piece
    was written. In a more recent article (“l’Echo du Temps”, Feb. 1980) I try
    to describe more accurately how this “destruction” of the community of
    capital can come about. It is an attempt to take up the question of what I
    call capital’s potential death, which is due to its movement of
    anthropomorphization and the capitalization of human beings.

    As capital openly installs its community it realizes a project of the
    human species and at the same time exhausts its possibilities. Being real
    contemporaries of our period requires a clear realization of the potential
    death of capital, in order that we may subsequently embark on a new
    dynamic of life. (Author’s note, March 1980)
