% Why I am not an Anti-Primitivist
% Lawrence Jarach
% 2010

## Introduction

There has never been a civilization that has lasted more than several
centuries. It is reasonable to assume that the one we are forced to inhabit
(Western, Euro-American, Capitalist, Post-Industrial, whatever you want to
call it…) will also someday fall apart. Identified and critiqued by anarchists
for over 150 years, the disparities between rich and poor and between
order-givers and order-takers are increasingly obvious and obnoxious;
mainstream public discourse is often gleefully polarized, permeated with
facile dehumanization of chosen enemies; so-called culture wars continue
apace; the devastating burdens imposed on the natural world and indigenous
people (including the semi-permanently displaced) by the extraction of
resources[^1] and the expansion and development of productive forces continues
unabated. The end of this civilization may have the characteristics of some
apocalyptic and bellicose horror show, similar to what some call The Collapse,
fodder for much American popular culture over the past decade. Alternatively,
it could look like a slow erosion of technological dependence with an
accompanying reversion to a simpler, decentralized, and rural-centric culture,
with people using up industrial gadgets and tinkering with them for as long as
there’s material to tinker with. It might even be the result of a self-managed
restructuring of urbanism, in line with the histrionics concerning
Revolutionary Barcelona (July 1936–April 1937). All anarchists agree, however,
that the current organization of this civilization is untenable.

## The Fear of Anarchism

Objections to the ideas and visions of various schools of anarchism come from
all directions. Anarchists tend to pay most attention to the ones coming from
Liberals and Leftists, those who see themselves as supposedly working for the
same goals as anarchists — or if *not exactly* the same, then at least for
something they call Social Justice (objections of conservatives,
reactionaries, racists, populists, and fascists derive from their devotion to
social hierarchies, the State, and the Leadership Principle, and are therefore
uninteresting).[^2] One of their many objections to anarchist revolution is
that thousands, if not millions, will die, whether through violent and
vengeful acts of class revenge or due to the propensity of The Masses to be
barbaric psychopaths. According to various statist ideologues, the only
barrier to a constant situation of rapine, murder, and widespread looting is a
strong state with its authoritarian agents to keep this volatile and chaotic
rabble in check. Surely there’s some irony to the left-anarchist objection to
an anti-civilization perspective that primarily relies on the same
argument.[^3]

The paranoia of the bourgeois liberal is that the rabble will target him
directly and personally for abuse, assault, and/or murder — a possibly
justifiable sentiment since those who own property, exploit laborers, and
generally push people around will be the most likely victims of the various
kinds of revenge devised and executed by an insurgent working class. The other
concern is that their property and wealth will be expropriated without
compensation, the typical result of authentic proletarian revolution. A
long-standing bourgeois conceit is the identification of themselves as a class
(and all their supposedly positive qualities such as temperance, modesty,
honesty, morality, *ad nauseum*) with the totality of society. Their paranoia
relative to any hint of revolution can be stated in a cretinous inversion of
the Wobbly slogan: “An Injury to One Self-Interested, Enlightened,
Economically Powerful Property Owner is an Injury to All.”

The paranoia of Leftists is that their useless — if not counter-revolutionary
— social function in any insurrectionary or revolutionary situation (let alone
during and after a decisive and definitive rupture with capitalism) will be
exposed. The inevitable result being that the rabble will quickly ignore,
ridicule, or otherwise dispense with the Leftists’ benevolent guidance and
progressively enlightened governance, if not them personally as incipient
bosses and exploiters. Such a concern has been explicitly articulated since at
least the time of the Great French Revolution, where the Jacobins consistently
expressed their fear and loathing of the *canaille*. A characterization — or
better, caricature — of gangs of uncontrollables wanting nothing better than
to destroy property and harm people (non-human animals hadn’t been
[re]invented in Europe yet) runs throughout the anti-anarchist socialism of
the Marxist and non-Marxist alike.

## The Fear of Anarcho-Primitivism

Anarchists who are dismissive of or hostile to anarcho-primitivist or
anti-civilization discussions try to shut down any discussion with the
assertion that “millions will die” or that these perspectives “promote
genocide.”[^4] If we take these statements as seriously as they warrant (which
is not very much), we need to respond with a pertinent question: Who,
precisely, are these anonymous millions who are supposedly going to die either
immediately, or very soon, once there’s no more electricity?

Will thousands of city dwellers starve without the trains and trucks that
transport food from the countryside and maritime ports to the shelves of their
local supermarkets? Once the sewers start backing up, and without adequate
access to clean water, will they die from cholera and typhus? Won’t that
happen if revolutionaries are successful in carving out an initial enclave,
some kind of anarchist city/region? Won’t the capitalists try to starve us
out? Won’t the global ruling class try to destroy our urban infrastructure the
same way they have done to their non-revolutionary enemies in Bosnia, Iraq,
Afghanistan, Gaza, Chechnya…?

## Thousands Die Iatrogenically

Adequate medical care has been a constant concern of anti-primitivists. They
have decided that a desire to scale back the intrusion of industrial medicine
equals sentencing thousands — if not millions — of people to death, either
from lack of any medical care, from starvation, or both. In terms of the
medical issue, who are the people whose lives would be in jeopardy in an
anarcho-primitivist future? People in renal failure without access to
dialysis?[^5] People who have to be fed through gastric tubes? People who
can’t breathe without being attached to ventilators? Those who are dependent
on other interventionist medical procedures like organ transplants? What about
the nearly two-hundred thousand who die annually through misdiagnosis,
incorrect drug therapy; through negligence or by accident in hospitals,
rehabilitation facilities, skilled nursing homes (etc); from botched
operations and/or exposure to contagious pathogens?[^6] Is there really no
decent anarchist critique of the pharmaceutical-industrial complex, with its
reliance on LD-50 protocols, animal experimentation, a plethora of injurious
or deadly so-called side effects and other unintended results?

It is implied by anti-primitivist anarchists that infections (acne *and*
sepsis?) are inevitably and invariably fatal — an annoyingly typical
canard.[^7] Those who make this allegation have no understanding of healing
techniques among non-civilized humans or the continual use of plant medicines
by rural and urban dwellers, not to mention the documented 4000 year-old
history of Traditional Asian Medicine. Studies of ethnobotanists and
anthropologists overflow with examples of the long-standing use of plant
medicines to treat everything from headaches and insomnia to hemorrhages and,
yes, infections. Archaeologists have found skeletal remains of early humans
who’ve clearly been seriously injured and who survived for years after.

Anti-primitivists who fear life-threatening medical issues also have no
comprehension of the history and practice of allopathy — mislabeled Western
Medicine by those who share the assumptions of Euro-American colonialism.
Aside from being a relatively recent innovation, allopathy as a healing
modality derives many of its successes specifically from military medicine,
especially in trauma care. Allopaths tend to be authoritarian, basing their
ameliorative treatments on perhaps the strictest division of labor of modern
civilization, that between healer and patient. Allopathy is expansionist; its
practitioners and protectors continually strive to supplant and/or suppress
all other healing modalities. And it is infantilizing; patients are removed
from the knowledge and ability to decide upon the course of their own
treatments. Allopaths are certainly successful; thousands of their patients
are healed, and lives are extended. But is the quantity of those extra years,
months, and days in various kinds of debilitating treatments (like
chemotherapy or dialysis among others) comparable to the quality of an
unalienated, unmediated life — however short(er)?[^8] Health concerns seem
paramount to most anti-primitivist anarchists, yet there also seems to be no
concurrent analysis of the mainstream medical establishment and its inherent
and attendant institutions of social control.[^9]

By way of contrast, Native American, African, Asian (Traditional and
non-traditional), and European herbal healing has a much longer tradition, and
is based on empirical progress through trial and error of both practitioners
and those with ailments.[^10] Probably beginning with observing other animals
in their environs, humans have had an extensive plant-based pharmacopeia for
almost as long as we have been around as an identifiable species — and some
paleo-anthropologists argue that the use of medicinal foods, like the use of
fire, has been an integral part of hominid *pre*history.

## Thousands Die Industrially

Thousands die or are injured each year from workplace accidents in the
developed capitalist world.[^11] Self-managing safety procedures and health
guidelines might make workplaces less onerous places to spend time, but it
can’t eliminate the dangers inherent in them. It is also important to mention
that many of the workplace safety improvements that have occurred in the US
over the past half-century are for the most part the results of actions
initiated and carried out through OSHA and other bureaucracies as well as
numerous lawsuits against owners. In effect the judicial arm of government is
used to combat the anti-proletarian excesses of the economic elite, hardly a
situation to champion if we are serious about abolishing the state.

Tens of thousands die or are injured in motor vehicle accidents every
year.[^12] If motor vehicle travel is destined to continue ATR, will the
anarchist revolution keep bad drivers off the road? Will self-management of
production and distribution make motorcyclists, bicyclists, or pedestrians any
more visible to car, bus, and truck drivers? Will a self-managed train system
prevent derailments? Will self-management prevent ships from running aground,
from collisions, from oil spills? Will the federation of self-managed shipping
industries be able to prevent the polluting of waterways? Will it prevent the
inadvertent maiming and killing of marine mammals?

## “Millions Will Die” and Other Absurdities

Prominent and vocal anti-primitivist anarcho-syndicalist Andrew Flood
confidently avers in his essay “Civilsation, Primitivism and anarchism”
(available at Anarkismo.net) that “there is no shortage of primitivists who
recognize that the primitive world they desire would require ‘mass die-offs’.”
Flood cites four sources: Miss Ann Thropy (not an anarchist or even a
primitivist, but an old-school Earth First!er[^13]); an anonymous FAQ writer
(possibly an anarchist[^14]); Derrick Jensen (also not an anarchist or a
primitivist[^15]); and the Coalition Against Civilization (the only actual
self-described anarcho-primitivist project on that list). Leaving aside the
actual content of the quotations, the immediate problem with these citations
is that there are primitivists who are not anarchists, just as there are those
who declare themselves to be against civilization who do not identify
themselves as anarchists or primitivists. Refusal to recognize and acknowledge
those distinctions (which, admittedly, can be quite subtle) is simply
dishonest.[^16]

Unfortunately for Flood (and others who wish to rely on his points), two of
those authors do not profess to be anarchists, so their
discussions/admissions/desires are irrelevant, unless Flood wishes to add the
use of guilt by (his) association to his rhetorical armory. A further
complication arises: who are we to choose as representative of a particular
tendency? In order to discredit specific tendencies within anarchism, or
anarchism in general, it is always possible to quote ridiculous anarchists
(Christians, pacifists, anti-imperialists…pick your least favorite). But what
would be the point, other than to prove that there are ridiculous anarchists?
It is difficult enough for all anarchists to agree about the relative
importance of various anarchist theorists, let alone to decide that they are
the *real* representatives of an authentic or traditional anarchism. Given
that anarchism is a complex and contradictory philosophy, it is usually better
to avoid such exercises.[^17] Flood’s decision to make certain writers into
typical primitivists is not credible; choosing to elevate any marginal writer
into some allegedly average representative of anarchism in general — or any of
its sub-tendencies (like primitivism) — is the epitome of bad faith, and is
especially annoying coming from someone who has taken it upon himself to
defend anarchism from fake anarchists and other distractions.

In addition there’s an enormous difference between acknowledging that a
speculative non-industrial lifeway would most likely necessitate a lower
population density and saying that those who acknowledge it are the ones who
are going to set up a genocidal system whereby the population gets culled (à
la Pol Pot, the famous anarcho-primitivist[?!] often cited by
anti-primitivists). The problem for anti-primitivists is that they only ever
interpret an acknowledgment as meaning that anarcho-primitivists want millions
to die so that their utopia can be realized. No anarcho-primitivist I know of
has suggested doing that; insisting that they do necessitates creating a
strawman. Ignoring and denying the subjectivity of others is an old
authoritarian trick, and is therefore especially unfortunate when used by
anarchists.

The imputation that any and all primitivists and/or anti-civvers are promoters
of genocide is absurd on its face. The statement “millions will die” is an
empty slogan, taken on faith — as if its continuous repetition by so many
different anti-primitivists makes it that much more credible. It is nothing
but a knee-jerk position against which it is impossible to argue; indeed it is
invoked and repeated precisely in order to shut down any possibility of
discussion. “Millions will die” is not an argument or even a simple opinion,
because there’s no way to counter or challenge it. It is a non-factual
assertion, held and promoted as dogma. Any and all dogmas are decidedly
unattractive for any self-described anarchist to cling to.

Flood states further on that “primitivism is no substitute for the anarchist
struggle for liberation, which involves adopting technology to our needs
rather then rejecting it.” This even less substantiated assertion leaves no
room for a reassessment of what sorts of technology are (or might be)
appropriate for a self-managed culture. At a time when industrialism, and what
can be understood as modern technology, started to make inroads in the
economic field (the period roughly between the Paris Commune and the Spanish
Revolution), such a statement coming from anarchists might have sounded
forward-looking and exciting, but at the beginning of the 21^st^ century such
an assertion sounds hopelessly naïve. Flood’s use of *technology* throughout
his oeuvre is divorced from any sort of critical appraisal; it belongs to the
discredited and discarded idea that technology is some kind of neutral system
that arises out of good intentions and unseen economic forces.[^18] The
complication of the interconnectedness of various beneficial technologies with
less-than-beneficial effects completely escapes those who adhere to this
simplistic position. The intertwined and expansionist aspects of modern
technology are part of the condition of domination and exploitation that we
are forced to endure; the dream of the technocrat is that there be no escape
for the rest of us. What alternatives exist for those of us whose desires
include not wanting to be so intimately connected to various kinds of
technology?

“The problem is that primitivists like to attack the very methods of mass
organization that are necessary for overthrowing capitalism,” is the last of
Flood’s claims that I’ll deal with. Countering this assertion has nothing to
do with primitivism; I hereby claim that attack on behalf of post-left
anarchists.[^19] The organizational questions for anarchists have always been,
and remain: what kind? for what purpose? with whom? Flood’s assertion is, once
again, not based on any sort of critical examination, this time of actual and
specific radical/anarchist history. The main attack on his assertion is
historical: so far, there’s never been a successful overthrowing of
capitalism, so there’s no way to test the validity or accuracy of his opinion.
We simply don’t know whether mass anarchist organizations will be a help, a
hindrance, or completely irrelevant to a definitive overthrowing of
capitalism. We have no examples to cite.[^20] At the very least it behooves
honest and thoughtful anarchists to remain skeptical of the alleged benefits
and indispensability of every sort of organization (mass or otherwise) to
achieving the goals of an anarchist revolution. But skepticism and critique
are beside the ideological point for fans of mass organization. Just like the
“mass die-off” mantra, the mass organization mantra has the force of dogma, a
True Belief; its appeal resides in the power of endless repetition.

Flood’s three assertions rely on the exact opposite of critical thinking and a
dispassionate examination of the historical data. Such ideological limitations
make for good rants, but wishful thinking elevated into a blinkered political
position and organizational goal just doesn’t cut it as a decent anarchist
strategy.

## Work After the Revolution

For the sake of argument, let’s say that there has been a global anarchist
revolution that has definitively abolished all states and all relations based
on capitalism. There are no more cops or bosses, and everyone in the world is
free to create/organize/maintain the necessary means for their own survival in
federated communes where all the vagaries of decision making are smoothed out,
and near-consensus is the norm. It’s now officially After The Revolution.

In the absence of a coercive apparatus connected to the rule of capitalism,
how many people will voluntarily spend time performing onerous tasks that are
necessary for the maintenance of mass-based city life? The extraction of metal
ores, chemicals, coal, and other current sources of wealth and production is
tedious as well as dangerous. Federated and self-managed methods of mining
won’t make it any less so. And even if such labor that is a prerequisite for
city life were less dangerous and tedious, how many people would choose to
perform it for three to five hours a week?

Let’s speculate that anywhere below 50% of those currently employed as miners
decided that, apart from really enjoying the tasks, they wanted to become
heroes of the revolution by exceeding their weekly quota of onerous labor in
mines. Would that be sufficient to sustain the infrastructure of global
industrialism? Sewage treatment/disposal is a necessity of urban existence.
How many committed urbanites will volunteer for more than their three to five
hours a week doing water reclamation? The various tasks required to maintain
city life in a way that wouldn’t mean a return to the kind of squalor that
typify the medieval era are no less onerous for being self-managed. Certainly
there will always be people who are willing to do more than what might be
considered their fair share of drudgery, but will it be sufficient to support
six billion people? Even a sustainable self-managed urban existence would
require a radical restructuring of the necessary infrastructure. Any urbanism
not based on a human-scale set of relationships (productive, distributive,
maintenance, innovative) would most likely reproduce — and probably very
quickly — the kinds of divisions of labor and mechanizations associated with
modern class-based metropolitan living. Questioning the foundations and
pillars of mass class society (division of labor, reliance on machines,
dependence on polluting fuels) is rarely part of any anti-primitivist
discussion.[^21] What’s to keep people from abandoning urban centers?

## Can Any Anarchist Feed Six Billion People?

Industrial civilization hasn’t done a very good job of helping to keep alive
the tens of thousands in the un(der)developed world currently without access
to clean water and adequate food; this nasty situation can be squarely blamed
on the profit-obsessed decisions of capitalists, with their rapacious appetite
for privatizing natural resources, and the enforcement of those divisions
through deadly conflict on the economic front as well as on the battlefield.
As many critics have tirelessly pointed out, the question is not
underproduction but unequal distribution. The sad truth, however, is that
abolishing capitalism won’t automatically allow those who are now suffering to
regain access to those resources. And, however unfortunate it may be to admit,
an anarchist revolution won’t necessarily help them either. Abolishing the
imposed regime of dispossession is a good start, but without an accompanying
desire and willingness on the part of those who suffer to alter their
situations and relationships themselves, we are back to the problem that faces
anarchists and any other authentic revolutionaries — namely, the apparent
resignation and apathy of those who suffer the most from the domination of
capital and commerce.

Agricultural work would probably require more than the fabled three to five
hours a week if peasants and farmers are expected to feed the entirety of the
world’s population. If there are to be large urban centers ATR, then there
will need to be large nearby areas devoted to farming in order to feed those
in the cities. And that’s leaving aside the entire question of a remedy to
landlessness: how many newly liberated peasants and farmers would return to
the areas from which they’d been exiled and dispossessed and continue
producing large-scale monoculture crops for export to the cities? Shouldn’t we
expect — as has been the case throughout modern history — that they would
reclaim and self-organize their fields with local/regional subsistence as a
priority? What is the anarcho-syndicalist program regarding the redistribution
of land, and how do they plan to feed six billion people while respecting,
supporting, and protecting the autonomy of those who wish to grow food? During
any transition to a revolutionary urbanism, would there be sufficient reserves
to feed six billion people? It is doubtful that even the most perfect
anarcho-syndicalist scenario can make the feeding of six billion any easier.

The challenge for those anarchists wedded to the idea of maintaining and/or
extending an urbanized society is to provide a few hints (certainly not
blueprints) about how roads, sewers, (inter)continental transport, fiber
optics, and other accoutrements of modern industrialism can be sustained
without threats, coercion, guilt-mongering, and the more banal pressure to
conform.[^22] At some point a balance needs to be found between the general
well-being of any human(e) culture and the specific demands of urban
existence. A friend once remarked to me in the course of such a speculative
discussion that if it came down to a choice between freedom and telephones, he
knows which he’d pick.

## Why I am Not an Anti-Primitivist

I am on record as being critical, but cautiously supportive, of
anarcho-primitivism.[^23] Despite my uneasiness and skepticism about many
aspects of anarcho-primitivism, I cannot consider myself an anti-primitivist.
So far, anti-primitivists have relied almost exclusively on the use of smears,
innuendo, and misrepresentations to try to score rhetorical points. Refusing
to accept what anarcho-primitivists say about themselves, anti-primitivists
rely on frantic denunciations rooted in insupportable caricature.[^24]

Challenging the assumptions of mass society and industrialism are among the
most important analytical contributions anarcho-primitivists have made to
anarchist theory, reminding us of what is possible to reclaim about human
culture and history. Some may yearn for a widespread return to gathering and
hunting, and some may be inspired by a deep-seated misanthropy, but their
commitment to the abolition of the state, capitalism, and domination places
them firmly within the anarchist realm. We can dispute their strategies and
tactics, and we should challenge their particular assumptions and analyses —
as we should with all radicals, ourselves included — but to do so in good
faith requires taking them seriously on their own terms, something virtually
all vocal anti-primitivists have shown themselves incapable of doing.

## Glossary

Civilization
  ~ Definitions and characteristics vary depending on the speaker/writer and
    what her agenda is. For the purposes of this essay I prefer to define it
    generically as referring to a condition where people live in cities and
    have particular cultural traits integrating them with, and separating them
    from, the inhabitants of surrounding rural areas; populations of cities
    are also (sub)culturally integrated and separated from others sharing the
    same urban landscape. This definition does not begin to encompass what is
    right — and wrong — with urban existence. We’ll leave the nitpicking over
    specific characteristics to another time and context.

Division of Labor
  ~ A regime where productive tasks are dissected to such a degree that no one
    person has the ability or opportunity to perform all of them; further, the
    knowledge and expertise required to transcend the division of labor is
    either compartmentalized, or withheld, or both. Specialization of tasks,
    which involves knowledge, expertise, and competence, is different from how
    sociologists understand division of labor. People can learn to specialize
    without becoming hierarchs, while divisions of labor reinforce and extend
    hierarchies and class distinctions.

Iatrogenesis
  ~ This fancy word refers to inadvertent or adverse effects or complications
    caused by, or resulting from, medical treatment or advice; it would appear
    to be in a different category from negligence. “Brought about by a healer”
    is the literal translation from the Greek

Anarcho-Primitivism
  ~ A school of anarchist thought emphasizing the inherently authoritarian and
    alienating aspects of civilization. The best anarcho-primitivists “see the
    primitive as a source of inspiration, as exemplifying forms of anarchy” (
    John Moore, A Primitivist Primer), while the worst reject class analysis,
    blaming all humans for the exploitation, domination, and destruction
    carried out by members of the global ruling elites.

Allopathy
  ~ A term coined by the Samuel Hahnemann (founder of Homeopathy), it is not
    the term that its practitioners prefer for themselves; being expansionist
    and authoritarian, they refer to themselves as regular or real medical
    doctors, while every other healer is a quack. I use it descriptively to
    refer to physicians who almost exclusively treat symptoms rather than
    causes, and who rely primarily on pharmaceutical and surgical
    interventions rather than prevention.

[^1]: The idea that water, soil, mineral deposits, forests, animals, and
    natives are considered resources (able to be
    extracted/used/exploited/destroyed) doesn’t seem to bother most
    pro-civilization anarchists.

[^2]: In the last decade there’s been a conscious tendency among some on the
    Right to adopt the style and rhetoric of anti-globalization and
    anti-imperialism, but this shouldn’t fool anyone. Any similarities to
    aspects of Leftism or anarchism are purely rhetorical; that such
    right-wing formations and their discourse isn’t dismissed and/or ridiculed
    out of hand, while obnoxious, is perhaps understandable in this postmodern
    era of style trumping substance. Add the confusion and general incoherence
    that permeates the Left and the resulting inability to distinguish their
    own rhetoric from the not-so-hidden agendas of those on the Right easily
    clouds the discourse, allowing the reactionaries to flourish because of
    the actual similarities between their respective authoritarian schemes.
    Too many anarchists, confused by their attachment to Leftist assumptions,
    fall for it as well.

[^3]: It is only ironic, however, if we take these anarchists at their word
    that they are actually interested in fomenting an anarchist (that is,
    genuinely anti-hierarchical, anti-statist, and anti-capitalist)
    revolution, one in/after which nobody would — or could — be pressured or
    compelled to engage in any activity that is not voluntary. Most of the
    schemes put forward by left anarchists sound more or less like
    self-managed versions of what exists today, just with more meetings; the
    rhetoric of “building the new inside the shell of the old” neatly avoids
    the question of precisely describing what it is, besides the nomenclature,
    they find objectionable about “the old.”

[^4]: Anarchists who have written about the supposed mass die-off include
    Andrew Flood (discussed below), Chaz Bufe, Brian Oliver Sheppard, Iain
    McKay, and — when he was still pretending to be an anarchist — Murray
    Bookchin. Anarchist fellow traveler commentators on the subject include
    Noam Chomsky.

[^5]: The U.S. Renal Data System’s 2004 annual report cited over one million
    dialysis patients worldwide, with an estimated 250,000 deaths per year in
    the US alone.

[^6]: According to S. Starfield’s essay “Is US health really the best in the
    world?” published in the *Journal of the American Medical Association*
    284: 483–85 (2000), adverse drug “events” account for 106,000 deaths per
    year; medical errors in hospitals account for 20,000; unnecessary
    surgeries account for 12,000; and medication errors account for 7000.

[^7]: We are assured by medical maven Chaz Bufe in his moralistic masterpiece
    *Listen, Anarchist!* that, “It’d be extremely difficult, for example, to
    make a case that we’d be better off without antibiotics… Returning to the
    preindustrial technological level of 500 years ago would not only
    eliminate the ‘means’ of combatting disease… Most children would die from
    disease before adulthood.” This is not the only unsubstantiated claim in
    Bufe’s screed, but it is among the most (unintentionally) hilarious;
    “most” children did not die 500, or even 1000, years ago; if they had, the
    world’s population would be substantially smaller. There are paeans to
    antibiotics and other medical in(ter)ventions scattered throughout the
    works of other anti-primitivists. Never mind that the overuse of
    antibiotics in the meat and dairy industries has contaminated local food
    and water supplies, never mind that the misuse of antibiotics in humans
    has resulted in the creation/adaptation of Super Bugs, strains of bacteria
    that have evolved resistance to every successive antibiotic that’s thrown
    at them.

[^8]: For an explicitly radical examination of this topic, see **N’Dréa: One
    Woman’s Fight to Die Her Own Way by Andréa Dorea** (Eberhardt Press, 2008)
    in which she can take allopathic institutions and their treatments only so
    long before reclaiming control over her own healing.

[^9]: The tendency to medicalize and psychiatrize social deviance is another
    huge problem with mainstream Euro-American medicine. “Science,” argued
    Foucault, “became the means by which the state has increasingly gained
    power over our bodies, by becoming the official arbiter of what may be
    considered ‘normal’ [healthy] and ‘abnormal [diseased].’ The more narrowly
    science defines what is normal, the more the state controls us. Being
    diagnosed as abnormal… *dictates a social reaction and intervention*.”
    (Jonathan Marks, **Why I am Not a Scientist: Anthropology and Modern
    Knowledge**, UC Press 2009, p.69, my emphasis) Unfortunately I began
    reading this amazing book too late for a fuller incorporation of Marks’s
    analysis into my essay.

[^10]: One or two deaths within a decade from a plant-based supplement or
    treatment is sufficient for the FDA to ban herbal medicines (compare
    footnote six above). The corruption of the FDA (dis)approval process is
    clear enough, with the pharmaceutical industry bankrolling research, and a
    revolving door between people working in government and private industry
    (cabinet-level bureaucrats in the executive branch have an analogous
    system with defense/intelligence/security contractors). Billions of
    dollars in profit are at stake, and patents on plants are still not easy
    to get.

[^11]: The number of private-sector non-fatal workplace illnesses and injuries
    was 3.7 million in 2008, over half of which resulted in lost days,
    transfers, or restrictions; 940,000 were reported from the public sector.
    In addition, “The preliminary count of fatal work injuries in the U.S. was
    5,071 in 2008, down from a revised total of 5,657 in 2007… The slowing
    economy was likely a factor in at least part of the decline.” US
    Department of Labor website.

[^12]: “There were an estimated 3.6 million highway-related injuries in the
    United States in 2001… An estimated 3.3 million of these injuries involved
    motor vehicle occupants. The rest involved about 131,000 pedestrians,
    111,000 motorcyclists, and 60,000 pedalcyclists.” And “Fatalities recorded
    in all transportation modes are estimated to be 45,026 in 2006. Highway
    fatalities represented about 95% of these recorded fatalities.” US
    Department of Transportation website.

[^13]: The controversial (semi-serious?) article extolling AIDS as population
    control was written in the mid-1980s, prior to the famous hippie versus
    redneck split in EF!; after this split (which the article in question did
    much to foment) and the departure of redneck co-founder Dave Foreman, many
    EF! locals became more friendly toward direct action oriented
    anarcho-activists. Earth First! has never been an exclusively anarchist
    project; from the mid-80s through mid-90s anarchist-oriented radical
    environmentalists in the US and Canada gravitated toward the journal *Live
    Wild or Die*.

[^14]: *Do or Die*, the now-defunct publication/activist project of the
    British branch of Earth First! had a continuously tenuous relationship to
    anarchism, entirely separate from the question of primitivism; EF! in the
    US has an even more incoherent analysis and practice.

[^15]: Despite having penned numerous repetitive and increasingly tedious
    jeremiads against civilization, his opportunistic, and half-hearted,
    commitment to anarchism is nicely summed up here — as far as I know the
    first time he’s publicly accepted the label: “I get called an anarchist a
    lot, and *I don’t mind*. Do I self-identify as an anarchist? Sometimes… I
    guess I’ll use it when it feels right, and I won’t when it doesn’t feel
    right… So yeah, I’m a writer, I’m an anarchist, I’m an
    anarcho-primitivist, *whatever* you want to call me, *whatever*, but then
    I’m a capitalist for that matter… and damn proud of it. *Whatever*…”
    **Mythmakers and Lawbreakers** (AK Press, 2009, pp 29–30, my emphasis.) At
    the time Flood wrote his critique, Jensen was indeed cozy with a few
    anarcho-primitivists who continually tried to enlist him involuntarily;
    recently there has been a thorough falling out, due in large part to
    Jensen’s monumental ego and accompanying inability to deal with even the
    slightest criticism, constructive or otherwise.

[^16]: Complaints about conflating neo-Platformists and anarcho-syndicalists
    abound as well, with those making the equation refusing to take seriously
    what members of either tendency say about themselves.

[^17]: Virtually all anarchists everywhere agree that Pierre-Joseph Proudhon,
    as the first person to call himself an anarchist proudly, was an important
    early figure of anarchist theory; not all find his insights or plans
    particularly relevant, however. Similar problems arise when we examine
    other famous or not-so-famous anarchist thinkers. There is a tension — and
    therefore a challenge for honest anarchists — between needing to
    acknowledge someone’s presence within the anarchist tradition even when we
    may disagree with her ideas and analysis. Bakunin and Kropotkin are less
    problematic than Proudhon, but are no less impervious to criticism. For a
    bizarre exercise in sectarianism and rewriting of history (complete with
    what may be the first full repudiation and excommunication of Proudhon),
    see **Black Flame** (reviewed elsewhere in this issue).

[^18]: “[F]ew adhere to the neutrality of technology thesis.” Tyler Veak,
    writing in the famous anarcho-primitivist [sic!] journal *Science,
    Technology and Human Values: Journal of the Social Studies of Science*
    (25.2, 2000), published through the auspices of that bastion of
    anti-Enlightenment thought, the Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State
    University.

[^19]: The rejection of mass organizations is one of the core issues that has
    prompted what can be loosely labeled post-left anarchist discourse. That
    there are overlaps and similarities among anarcho-primitivist and
    post-left anarchist discourse is undeniable, but they remain distinct
    tendencies. The editors of this journal have taken it upon ourselves to be
    among the primary theoreticians and commentators of this tendency that
    aims to reclaim some neglected aspects of traditional anarchism while
    embracing some of the more recent relevant insights of — among others —
    post-structuralists, radical feminists, and the Situationists and other
    Left critics of Marxism and Party Communism.

[^20]: The usual examples of actually existing anarchy (parts of the Ukraine,
    1918–21 and parts of Spain, 1936–37) are not actually applicable. Not
    because they were not successful, but because for as long as anarchists
    were supposed to have been in charge, there was no definitive abolition of
    either the state or capitalism (although it can be argued that the
    Makhnovists were able to go farther in that direction than the
    *cenetistas*), no matter how hard the anarchist militants tried — and
    clearly many tried as hard as they could. In both examples the anarchists
    faced similar problems. The major internal obstacle was an incomplete and/
    or incoherent analysis of both the state and capitalism, which inevitably
    led to many strategic mistakes. The major external obstacle for each was
    the constraint of imperialist war plus their numerically and militarily
    stronger enemies on the Left and the Right — the anarchists had to fight
    both at the same time. The lesson of Makhno’s defeat was to suggest the
    cadre-based Organizational Platform as a corrective, while ten years later
    in Spain, the mass organization helped to bury the very revolution they
    said they were supporting.

[^21]: Despite being fiction, LeGuin’s **The Dispossessed** is a brilliant
    rumination on an explicitly anarchist society plagued by conformity,
    bureaucracy, guilt, and other unsavory aspects of an officially
    anti-hierarchical culture.

[^22]: See my essay “Why Primitivism (Without Adjectives) Makes Me Nervous” in
    *AJODA* \#52.

[^23]: *Ibid.*

[^24]: Anti-primitivists are not the only anarchists who use such tactics
    against their perceived rivals, nor are anarcho-primitivists their only
    targets. Post-lefties, CrimethInckers, insurrectionists, animal/earth
    liberationists… any anarchist who doesn’t fit whatever parameters the
    champions and guardians of Left Anarchism find compelling is asking for
    the same kind of trouble.
