% Lines in Sand
% Peter Gelderloos
% 2010

There is a line that divides many people whose struggles I respect. I won’t
name this line or define either camp, to avoid entrenching them, and I don’t
know of any fair definitions that have been put forward by any of those
involved in this antagonism. Most of us are familiar with the strawmen that
litter this battlefield, though. Those on one side are guilty of “identity
politics,” those on the other are “privileged” or “dogmatic.”

In some cases I think the different practices can complement each other, each
having their own shortcomings. But in other cases they are merely different; I
know of people on either side who seem to me to have a complete revolutionary
practice, with its own particular advantages, but no failing that could be
addressed by the other side. Simultaneously, there are those on both sides who
I do not consider allies. Among those who speak of social war are some who
want a homogenous front that struggles only for freedom in the abstract, who
stifle any talk of oppressions they do not personally experience. And among
those who speak of privilege and oppression are some who are just politicians
and guilt-mongerers.

Between those who speak of privilege and oppression, and those who speak of
social war, I come largely from the former, and now find myself closer to the
latter. While I want to direct these criticisms in multiple directions, I
don’t want to create a false balance between two fictive positions. I hope
these criticisms aid not in the development of a better anarchist practice, a
peace or synthesis between those who have not seen eye to eye, but in the
development of better anarchist practices that need not ever come to terms.

However, recognizing that we’ll never all agree on anything, and this is good,
I want to argue nonetheless that a needed common ground is an understanding
and embrace of social war. I’m afraid that those who speak of oppression
without acknowledging the war we are a part of, not as metaphor but as a real
and current practice, will only succeed in turning a battlefield into a
garden, decorating this cemetery of a society with flowers, ensuring equality
of access to a graveyard. I don’t care to argue that one side or another is
more correct, only that revolution becomes impossible when we start believing
in civil society and stop noticing that the guns are pointed at us too.

It is vital to have connections with people we don’t share affinity with,
people who are different from us, but it can be difficult to work with people
whose desires are reformist without also adopting reformist modes of struggle.
Lacking a specific and foregrounded critique of recuperation, as do many who
focus on privilege and oppression, coalition politics are almost certain to
end up in Popular Fronts that stifle anarchist critiques, prop up Authority,
and hoodwink anti-authoritarians into being the shock troops or grunt workers
for the leftwing of the system, whether in the guise of NGOs, progressive
politicians, or Stalinist parties.

Under democratic government, recuperation is far more common than repression
as a tool for counterinsurgency. They prefer the carrot over the stick. Those
who talk about exclusion more than exploitation, and who focus on getting more
carrots for everyone, are sure to defeat themselves.

“You Have to Do It My Way” was written in the summer of 2009, and “So Fucked
Up” and “Some Suggestions” were written in the summer of 2010.

# You Have to Do It My Way

## Ideological identity, experienced identity, and arrogance among anarchists

One of the most loaded terms I see in the critiques of certain anarchists is
“identity politics.” What exactly are identity politics? I can’t deduce a
coherent definition from its usage; given how the term is thrown around it
seems only to imply that the speaker is annoyed by someone else focusing on
racism or sexism. I thought identity politics meant the process of creating a
homogenous identity within a certain population to serve as a political
constituency and power base for a group of politicians, whose role as
exploiters sitting atop that population is hidden by the shared use of that
singular identity. In other words it calls up the likes of Gloria Steinem,
Adolf Hitler, David Ben-Gurion, or Ron Karenga.

Yet when anarchists use this term, frequently they’re using it against people
involved in the construction of fluid, heterogenous, and complex identities,
who extend solidarity to people with different identities and develop holistic
critiques of power, and adoption of this identity does not also mean the
adoption of a preformulated and unquestionable dogma. For example, the group
Anarchist People of Color includes people who identify as black, latina,
indigenous, Asian, Palestinian, biracial; immigrants and citizens; queer and
trans people. From what I know from the outside, they engage in discussions
regarding these multiple identities rather than suppressing internal
difference. Their published writings reflect a diversity of thought rather
than a single political line. I’ve read things by APOC members I disagree
with, and other things that have really challenged or developed my thinking
regarding imperialism, race, gender, anarchist struggle, and other themes. I
know of people of color who are critical of the way the group operates and
don’t feel included, and I know white people who strongly dislike
generalizations regarding themselves that often appear in writings by APOC. I
don’t let these bother me because I know that without exception, someone’s
definition of an Other can be useful, but never valid. Beyond this I’ve read
one or two things from members of this group that were purposeful
manipulations of white guilt. [This essay was written before Smack a White Boy
2].

All this goes to show that this group is not a singular entity and they
express a range of perspectives in a number of different manners. However in
disregard for this diversity there has been a certain singularity of response
from white anarchists: whenever writings from the group are posted on other
anarchist websites the charge of “identity politics” inevitably appears in the
comments section, regardless of whether the writing being critiqued posits
essential differences or homogenous, unchanging categories.

Perhaps for many anarchists, identity politics have come to mean the
construction of identities within political projects? But this doesn’t pan out
either. You have the more old-fashioned white anarchists claiming that there
is only the working class, and that emphasis on race or gender divides the
working class, thus aiding the capitalists. Others don’t go in much for the
workers and identify strictly as anarchists. One typical internet harangue of
Anarchist People of Color bristled at their support for Mumia abu-Jamal, who
is “not an anarchist.” Does this mean we should be concerned about what
happens to other anarchists, but what happens to other people in the same
social category as us doesn’t affect us? In the end it’s not a coherent
criticism, it’s just white people telling people of color how they should
identify. This is true identity politics, in the Mobutu Sese Seko sense of the
term, that only regards one identity as natural or at least unquestionable in
the common project (nationhood, the struggle against capitalism, what have
you), and any other identity as superfluous or harmful.

A common argument made by these critics of a poorly identified identity
politics seems to be that the speaker pays lipservice to the evils of racism
or sexism but claims that the basis of racism and sexism is the division of
people into categories along lines of race or sex, thus people who include
these divisions in their political work are guilty of reinforcing rather than
attacking the oppression itself. How valid is this hypothesis? First I want to
analyze the logic a little more. An assumption underlying this argument is
that the first apparent feature, chronologically, of a phenomenon will become
the basis of that phenomenon, and thus its generative feature. In other words,
a distinction of gender is a prerequisite for sexism, thus gender distinctions
generate sexism and by destroying gender distinctions we destroy sexism. What
was that video game where the boss of a certain level is this evil bug that
flies around and suddenly multiplies into a dozen copies of itself, but if you
can kill the original, then they all die? Anyways I think I make my point: if
identity itself is the basis for oppression then we can destroy oppression by
destroying identity. A further assumption of this line of reasoning is that
history is mechanical, progressive, and unilineal, because if the first
feature of a phenomenon automatically leads to the development of the entire
phenomenon, then there is no possibility for multiple outcomes or even for
stasis or reversal. A always leads to B always leads to C.

There. The idea has lost its clothes. It reveals itself to be Historical
Materialist at best, and Social Darwinist at worst.

In this sense it bears similarity to the worst excesses of primitivism (which,
don’t get me wrong, I believe has had a number of good influences on anarchist
theory and practice), namely that the development of agriculture led
inevitably to the development of authority, which is historically untrue,
unless we redefine authority to mean, well, agriculture.

I can’t argue hard enough that history is neither mechanical, progressive, nor
unilineal. These characterizations are a fundament of Western dogma, and God
help us if they are true because that would mean that unless anarchy has been
preordained by the machines of history then there is nothing we can do to
bring it about.

Revealing the cultural assumptions hiding behind this particular understanding
of identity is far from enough to disprove it. So let’s take it at face value:
do identity categories in themselves recreate the oppressions that operate on
those identities? I don’t think there’s any evidence of this. For every
example that occurs to me of some authoritarian group that used identity to
suppress difference or create prejudice, even as they were fighting against
oppression, I can think of another group of oppressed people who used identity
as a means of survival and who maintained relationships with people and groups
with other identities to jointly attack the power structure itself.

One might argue that when it comes to indigenous people, it is not at all the
category that oppresses them, it’s the people who came and stole their land
and continue to colonize them, and in this case the identity of being
indigenous may be a vital tool in surviving cultural genocide. Losing that
category may be tantamount to disappearing as a people and allowing the
genocide to run its full course. One might also say that anthropologists and
philosophers who look at identities as tools are only reflecting their own
manipulative and mechanical way of looking at the world, and that an
indigenous identity is a history, a culture, a community, and an inseperable
part of who one is. I don’t know. In any case, many active indigenous people
have already expressed that white people’s denial of their identity and
nationhood is one reason they don’t work with white people, and as a
generalization white people didn’t listen.

But this vague critique of identity politics rejects such an argument. It’s a
posture that bears much in common with the postmodern rejection of Grand
Narratives. This rejection is highly useful in denying the racial myths of
European nationhood and refusing the stories that give us a shared history
with our rulers. This is great. On the other hand such a posture prevents one
from acknowledging legacies and histories of resistance and oppression, which
is useful for the rulers. For example, if one can only connect oneself to 500
years of brutal colonial oppression and also 500 years of impressive
resistance, by identifying oneself within a certain category of people, and we
hold such categorization to be oppressive and undesirable, then how is one to
make sense of her position in society if she grows up in highly marginalized
circumstances and is treated a certain way by ruling institutions and a great
many people on the street? This is just coincidence? And when she finds out
that the other people in her family, and certain other people all across the
country, have experiences that are remarkably similar, while the dominant
culture talks nothing of these experiences, this is just meaningless? Or is it
a legitimate basis for a shared identity, and a point of departure for
struggle?

I have to say that the example I’m giving is miles away from my personal
experience. All the identities that society tried to stitch me into don’t fit,
and the fabric is coarse: man, American, white person, member of the middle
class, or more recently, outcast, failure, criminal, terrorist. To varying
degrees I have peeled these identities off my body. The common experience I
find with other people is our shared alienation, our desire to destroy what
created us. It would be unfair to call this a white experience, or a middle
class experience, because of all the other people I have met who also share
this experience. On the other hand it would be tokenistic to assert that this
identity-free identity is one-size-fits-all just because I’ve seen it fit so
many different types of people. I might tie this experience to growing up in
the suburbs, and in most cases I might be right, but to declare this a
suburban identity would be unfair to all the people who grew up in the same
categories as me but had different experiences, or all the people who had
similar experiences despite growing up in different categories.

Even though a negative identity is still an identity, it doesn’t feel like
one, so building a politics around that particular experience of the world, as
CrimethInc. has done quite effectively, I would argue, doesn’t seem to have
any commonality with identity politics, though in fact it does. In fact it is
typical to the category that I grew up in that I have generally never wanted
to belong to an identity group, and I always felt awkward and pretentious when
I tried one on.

Until I met anarchy. I don’t mean anarchism, or the anarchist movement, I mean
the shared experience of struggle with people who have my back, who comprise
my material and emotional community, who share my history, and who learn and
grow within a very real continuity of struggle that goes all the way back to
the Spanish Civil War, the Russian Revolution, the Paris Commune (a continuity
that doesn’t exist in the United States, in my experience). People who will
invite you into their home and feed you because they share the same dream,
people who will risk themselves for you in the street when they don’t even
know you, because they can look at you and know you’re on the same side. It
was when I met the grandparents of the struggle, who fought in mythical 1936,
met them as friends, and doing so realized that one day I or my friends, if we
survived, would be the grandpas and grandmas telling stories of a struggle
equally distant in time; it was when my friend took me on a tour of Moscow (or
Barcelona, or Berlin, or that little village in Friesland) and showed me —
this is where they killed our friends Stas and Nastya a few months ago, and
here is where the Bolsheviks executed some anarchists in 1921 — and I realized
that these places had the same meaning; that’s when history became demystified
and I discovered that the anarchists are my people.

This is not an identity I want to ideologize or spread beyond my own personal
experience. But it’s something I feel very real in my bones. And it’s
something that shows me that my discomfort with identity was in part an
alienation from the history of struggle.

But the identity of anarchist does not say much to my starting position in
society or the forms of privilege and exploitation the various ruling
institutions have designated for me. What about an identity imposed on me by
racism and sexism, by the nation? At this level my identity tells me of my
descent from a long line of poor farmers who over the years consciously
decided to cooperate with a capitalistic, religious, and racial project that
ultimately left me with an inheritance stripped of anything I value. My living
relatives no longer even farm or work with their hands; in the end their
farming was the first rung on a professional ladder. They did not fight for
their land and resist the enclosures or the industrialization of farming, and
they cooperated fully in the various forms of active racism white people
engaged in to create the United States. And in their eagerness to control each
other and stay within their complementary reproductive roles, they created
patterns of abuse that almost destroyed me before I was old enough to
understand what the hell was going on. The bad choices of my ancestors help
explain the well fed misery I was born into, and give my struggle more
meaning. And this part of my identity bears overwhelming similarities with the
identities of many other people, and overwhelming differences with the
identities of even more people.

To get theoretical again, the discomfort with identity also seems to me to be
a symptom of postmodern society. Oh God, not that dreaded label (even worse
than “identity politics”). But no, patient reader, I mean something very
concrete by that. I mean the postmodern recognition that identity is
constructed and performative, and its association of identity with the ironic
and insincere, consequential to the unprecedented bombardment of the
individual with the basest forms of marketing and chicanery to manipulate the
formation of an identity that has become nothing more than an interface with
commodities and political categories. How the hell can we take identity
seriously when it is so evidently produced for us by clothing commercials,
sports teams, and talk radio?

But moving beyond the historical moment in which, for many people, identity
has become an absurdity, what is identity if it is not inherently a product of
manipulative outside factors? I would argue that even though identity is a
project and it is historical, it is nonetheless natural, in the sense that it
arises from the nature of human consciousness. Identity is a function of the
way humans understand ourselves and recognize others; and I would make the
Chomskian argument that the epistemological movement to and beyond categories
is universal to the human brain itself. In other words, I think that we always
have and always will label ourselves and others, challenge these labels,
reinforce them, abandon them and integrate the fragments into new labels, and
there is nothing wrong with this project except where it intersects with an
authoritarian society that uses a discourse and a regulation of identities,
among many other means, to not let people be who they want to be. Thus, using
or not using identities is not as important as addressing the very real social
structures and power dynamics that lie behind these identities.

It seems to me that addressing our personal relationship to these power
structures entails the creation of identity if it includes any talk of a
collective response, i.e. struggle. This is true even if we adopt as broad an
identity as “the exploited.” Our identity becomes more specific the more
specifically we examine those power structures and how they affect us. If we
try to understand patriarchy and colonialism and migrant labor and liquor
stores, something as vague as “the exploited” is no longer a useful identity
to help us understand our place in all of this. Such a broad identity can be
useful in preventing an atomized understanding of the system — it is a
wholesale rejection of the system on the part of everyone who can consider
themselves exploited by it (which is basically everybody). But this need not
entail a rejection of a specific approach that looks at one or several parts
of the system in detail, in tandem with a more specific identity, as long as
that approach does not lose a holistic analysis of the system and thus give
birth to a partial struggle.

After all, identities need not be singular or mutually exclusive. In examining
patriarchy it becomes apparent that different people have different
categorical relationships with that power structure, but just because someone
understands herself to be a woman does not at all prevent her from
understanding herself as an enemy of the entire system, together with all the
other enemies of the system.

Here I want to quote from a thought-provoking article by Craig Calhoun about
identity politics. He provides a succinct definition of essentialism in
identity which is similar to the one Lawrence Jarach uses in his article
“Essentialism and Identity Politics,” although I find the Calhoun article to
be better developed, much more precise, and less loaded. He defines
essentialism as the “[notion] that individual persons can have singular,
integral, altogether harmonious and unproblematic identities.” Further along:

> “Bosnian Muslim feminists and other advocates of Bosnian women faced in 1993
> a horrific version of the way nationalism and gender can collide. Serbian
> men raped thousands of Bosnian women […]. This was a specifically gendered
> violation equally specifically deployed against a nationally defined group.
> Yet Bosnian men added to the calamity by treating the women who were raped
> as defiled and impure. They were defiled not only in the general sexist
> discourse of female purity, but in a specifically nationalist discourse in
> which they had been inscribed in proper roles as daughters, wives and
> mothers. To think of themselves as either women rather than Bosnian Muslims
> or Bosnian Muslims rather than women made no sense. They were raped because
> they were both, and to condemn the Bosnian Muslim culture equally with the
> Serbian project of ethnic cleansing (as some American feminists have done)
> is to condemn those very women. Yet the obvious claim to be both women and
> Bosnian Muslims was available only as a political project (however implicit)
> to refigure the discourses of gender, religion and nation within which their
> identities were inscribed and on the bases of which their bodies and their
> honor alike were violated.
>
> […] But the puzzles lie not just in invocations of strong collective
> identity claims. They lie also in the extent to which people […] are not
> moved by any strong claims of identity — or communality — with others and
> respond instead to individualistic appeals to self-realization. Moreover,
> these two are not altogether mutually exclusive in practice. The same
> unwillingness to work in complex struggles for social transformation may lie
> behind both a preference for individualistic, psychologistic solutions to
> problems and a tendency to accept the illusory solutions offered by strong,
> simplistic identity claims on behalf of nations, races and other putatively
> undifferentiated categories.”[^1]

How can emphasizing collective identities actually be helpful in an anarchist
struggle? I can think of plenty of examples. Here’s a good one. One of my best
friends in the place where I live now was, when I met her, a lesbian
separatist feminist. She is an anarchist and we had plenty of affinity, but in
the majority of her political projects and personal relationships she chose to
only have contact with other women. She lived in a women-only house, worked
with a women-only self-defense group as well as a couple women-only political
collectives, and she only had romantic relationships with women. She chose
this strategy because of her personal experience with sexual and sexist
violence, because it seemed to her that only women really understood and could
support her in these experiences, because she notices a different dynamic in
these women-only groups that feels safer and also more enabling of effective
communication and action, and because she’s sick of always having to justify
her experiences or argue with men and with anti-feminist women that the sexist
violence experienced by her and her friends actually exists.

It would be arrogant to tell her that these experiences are invalid, and
moreover, her effectiveness as an anarchist seems to validate her strategy.
From what I have seen, she has made important contributions to the struggle
against sexism that include direct action against rapists, counterinformation,
and participation in theoretical debates that most anarchists here have deemed
important, regardless of what side they take. And she has made important
contributions to the anarchist movement, beyond its feminist aspects. Of
course I can’t say what these have been, but I would wager that nearly all
anarchists, regardless of how they feel about so-called identity politics,
would find her work to be worthwhile and even impressive. And the base for
much of this work is the safe space she has created for herself in women-only
groups.

The whole time I have known her, she never imposed an identity on me or made
me feel devalued or excluded. All it took was for me to listen to her, accept
her experiences as valid, and respect her choices regarding whom she wanted to
work with and when, even if it meant that sometimes she didn’t want to work
with me, not so much because of my gender, but because of her gender
experiences. As a Catalan anarchist pointed out, separatism is only separatism
if we accept the authority that bound the two together in the first place.
Otherwise, it’s voluntary association.

This constitutes one of several stories I am familiar with that contradict the
hypothesis that anarchist strategies emphasizing identity will divide the
struggle or recreate oppression. But this example is especially interesting
because this friend of mine is no longer a lesbian separatist. She now works
in mixed groups and has relations with boys. She does not reject her old
strategy, she has just moved beyond it. It was a necessary part of her
process. Other anarcha-feminists here remain more permanently in that mode of
action and although we have less common ground to struggle together, I respect
that they are doing important work, which I can see, as just one example, by
how much they helped my friend. For me to set some sort of timetable for them,
to demand that they pass through separatism as a phase, would be the height of
arrogance. As long as I respect their work and they respect mine, the struggle
is not divided. The division occurs when we invalidate the struggle of people
who have chosen to focus on a different part of the system.

What I wish all those snooty bastards who tout the term “identity politics”
would understand is that anarchist theories and practices exist to serve our
needs. This is not to say that anything goes, that I’m okay and you’re okay,
but that the basis for our criticisms should be how well our practices serve
us in our struggle for liberation rather than how well our practices fit a
clear blueprint derived from a pure anarchist ideology. Yet so often I hear
the formula: anarchism is opposed to involuntary categories, so organizing as
women or as people of color or reinforcing those categories in any way is
contrary to anarchism. This reminds me of debating pacifists. “We want a
peaceful world, so you can’t use violence to get there.”

Not only are there many examples of struggles that are aided by the
development or defense of identity, I would argue that the rejection of
identity implicit in a rejection of political contestations of identity is a
throwback to times when social struggles willingly adopted institutional forms
— to when the anarchist movement hadn’t yet learned what anarchism really was.
A rejection of identity differentiation and the concomitant homogeneity of an
implicit identity (whether that be “the exploited” or “the workers”) makes
more sense within the “one big union” form of organizing that has largely been
retired by the struggle, than it does within the networks that are more common
today. A fundamental feature of networks as I understand them is the autonomy
of their constituent parts, and this autonomy and the ability of distinct
parts to recognize and relate to one another is developed precisely in the
continuous project of identity formation.

Yes, identity can be misused. So can culture, or individuality. Rejecting
identity is revealed to be as absurd as rejecting culture or individuality
when we recognize that forming identities is a part of being human. What we
should reject is borders, purity, and control within the formation of
identities.

It is not enough to dismiss racism and sexism. Yes, race and gender are
socially constructed, but that does not make them any less real (moreover
gender arguably has not been oppressive in every society in which it has
existed). Racism and sexism require specific attention and prolonged struggle
in order to be destroyed, just the same as how capital is a social construct,
yet capitalism will not be destroyed without specific attention and prolonged
struggle. In a criticism of sexism within the movement there, a Greek
insurrectionist, who was also an anarchist and a feminist, said that freedom
is not theoretical, it is practical. Freedom exists not on being declared but
when we figure out how to make it work on the ground, and when we fight for
it. I agree wholeheartedly: this is the difference between the liberal notion
of freedom and the anarchist one.

In working out these practical details we will start from our own experiences
and we will develop our own strategies. But anarchy can only benefit from a
diversity of experiences and strategies.

# So Fucked Up

## Guilt, Disempowerment, and Other Mistakes of an Anti-Oppression practice

Many folks who were learning how to be good anarchists between 2000–2005 on
the East Coast were influenced by what I’m going to call an “anti-oppression
practice.” The phenomenon is broader than this; I’m simply speaking from
experience. The term is not precise, and I want to keep it that way, so no one
feels pigeon-holed, and so everyone can consider whether these criticisms
apply to them or not; and at the same time so no one can ignore these
criticisms if they do not fit within the precisely defined target.

An anti-oppression practice posits a list of different forms of oppression at
work in society on a macro and micro level, that reproduce themselves through
socialization at the micro level and through continuing political and economic
restructuration carried out by elite institutions at the macro level. This
practice has cultivated a number of strengths in the anarchists who passed
through it — an awareness of one’s socialization, a sensitivity to situations
and group power dynamics, the challenging of traditional identities, an
abandonment of the monolithic politics of the now extinct revolutionary Left,
which could not fathom forms of oppression that were not primarily economic.

But anti-oppression politics, though not homogenous, has a number of common
weaknesses built into it thanks to the academic culture out of which it
largely grew; the guilt, blame, and victimization that run especially intense
in the Anglo-Saxon colonial society of the US; and the leftism and reformism
of many formulators of this practice with whom anti-oppression anarchists
uncritically allied themselves. I think the practice has blocked off its own
path to revolution, and needs to be junked. A few key parts can be salvaged.
The rest should be left to the desert.

## Guilt

The second lesson new acolytes learn in an anti-oppression practice is that
feeling guilty for privilege is also “fucked up.” The Calvinists couldn’t have
done it better. Guilt is intentionally built into anti-oppression politics,
firmly rooted in its syllabus. Anyone who has a heart is going to feel guilty
when they are assigned the label of “privileged,” when they are pressured to
acknowledge that “all white people are racist” or “all men are sexist” (both
of these statements are tenets of anti-oppression politics). Dogmatically
insisting that guilt on the part of privileged people is unhelpful and
burdensome for oppressed people only ensures that their guilt is permanent and
self-perpetuating, because there are no tools in this toolbox for righting the
wrongs that are the source of the guilt; only for acknowledging them. It is an
original sin practitioners are powerless to change.

Quickly, a division becomes apparent in the mobilization of guilt within an
anti-oppression practice. Because of the laundry list of oppressions that
require equal consideration, nearly every individual is privileged in some
way, and oppressed in others. However, anti-oppression activists refuse to use
“privilege” and “oppress” as situational verbs, with the obvious connotation
that these are things imposed by a larger social structure. Instead, the
commonly upheld norm is to use these terms as labels that inhere to
individuals and qualify *who they are*. This means that most individuals can
choose what is, according to the theory, not something we have an ability to
choose: which category we belong to. Theoretically this comes with an
awareness of an intersectionality of different oppressions, but in practice
people end up identifying and being identified with one camp or the other.
Skin color tends to be the prime determinant in whether someone can get away
with identifying as privileged or oppressed.

Because revolution or “social change” is reformulated as working against
oppression, and because “those most directly affected by an oppression must
lead their own struggle” (another common tenet), people in the oppressed
category become the primary agents of social change. A system of rewards
develops to encourage compliance with this practice. Privileged people gain
power and legitimacy by being allies to oppressed people. It is conceded that
privileged people are also negatively affected by the system, but the
appropriate response to their privilege is to educate themselves and call one
another out on all the ways they are tied to and benefit from the system at
the expense of others. (A friend of mine aptly calls this a zero sum economy
of power). Privileged people who forcefully struggle against oppressive
institutions are frequently called back into line for trying to lead other
people’s struggles, or endangering those who are more oppressed. In other
words, their major opportunity for struggle as something other than
self-improvement is as an ally in the struggles of others.

Here we see another contradiction; tokenization and paternalism are on any
list of “fucked up” behaviors in an anti-oppression practice, thus the
practice protects itself from open complicity with the very problems it
creates. Human agency is a fundamental component of freedom, perhaps the most
important one; therefore if someone is denied agency in their own struggle
because the most legit thing they can do is be an ally to someone else’s
struggle, it is inevitable that they will exercise their agency in the course
of supporting a struggle they view as someone else’s. To do so, they will
either look for any oppressed person who supports a form of struggle they feel
inclined towards, and use them as a legitimating façade, or they will try to
participate fully and affect the course of a broader campaign or coalition in
which they are pretending to be mere allies. In other words, by presenting
privilege as a good thing, anti-oppression politics creates privileged people
who have nothing to fight for and inevitably tokenize or paternalize those
whose struggles are deemed (more) legitimate.

White men within the anti-oppression practice gain legitimacy and influence by
appearing hyper-sensitive and self-flagellating, and by visibly acknowledging
their privilege. Because this inevitably creates guilt, and guilt is a
crippling emotion, those white men who will be most effective as
anti-oppression activists will be those who are least affected by their shows
of guilt, in other words, the least sincere. White women, or others who
generally have to identify as privileged but also visibly belong to some
oppressed category, remain effective by shifting guilt up the pyramid. A
frequent formulation is to acknowledge white privilege, but consistently talk
about “white men” as the creators of patriarchy and white supremacy, as though
men of color or white women were powerless and uncompliant in these respective
processes.

Those fully in the oppressed category face another power dynamic within the
political space of anti-oppression activism. They either have to put up with
allies like these, and, frustrated by the constant hypocrisy that they help
perpetuate by ascribing to the political values of anti-oppression activism,
face the choice of walling themselves off from those who are supposed to be
their comrades or wasting all their time educating them out of contradictions
that aren’t going away.

Or, they are there because they specifically want allies like these, and want
the forms of political power that accumulate to those who are categorized as
oppressed within this practice. While I think most people who choose
anti-oppression politics are sincere and do a lot of good, there can be no
doubt that that political space attracts politicians who thrive on the power
plays and office politics that infest anti-oppression groupings,
organizations, and affiliated NGOs. Friends of mine who chose to work with
respected organizations led by oppressed people have experienced such an
extreme degree of manipulation and mindfucking that I find it completely fair
to say that the leaders of those particular organizations, which I won’t name,
were not revolutionaries, but careerists.

## Agency

As a generalization, anti-oppression politics primarily sees individuals as a
node of intersecting oppressions, each of which generate common experiences
among their subjects. The result is the sometimes implicit, sometimes explicit
assumption that one’s place in the hierarchy (differently abled queer
female-bodied latina) can tell you more about them and their history than any
individual differences. Some anti-oppression activists are more gung-ho than
others in this minimization of personal experience, but I would argue that
those who are less gung-ho and more sensitive are in fact more hypocritical or
inconsistent, as such a minimization of the individual is an inevitable
product of an analysis that foregrounds one’s position in hierarchies of
privilege and oppression.

I think this fact is not unrelated to the embarrassing, one might even say
harmful, delay before anti-oppression activists acknowledged how frequently
people socialized as men have experienced sexual violence. In fact, the denial
of trauma with which men are socialized proved to be quite at home in
anti-oppression politics precisely because those politics reinforced that
socialization by encouraging men who have been intimately harmed by our
society to view themselves as extraordinarily privileged by it and complicit
in it.

In other words, by emphasizing how certain people are privileged, this
practice has in some ways perpetuated rather than undermined a personal
identification with the system, and prevented struggle against it, in the
rubric of self-improvement or taking personal responsibility, an ethic that
has already proven its counterrevolutionary effectiveness when in the hands of
the Christians.

I think awareness of history and socialization is critically important. But
the set of nuances and emphases that anti-oppression activists choose
encourages personal identification with systems of oppression rather than
mutiny, in the case of those in the privileged box, and victimization by
systems of oppression that are perpetuated by allies as much as by enemies, in
the case of those in the oppressed box.

By putting interpersonal or micro power-dynamics on par with structural or
macro power-dynamics, these activists may be training themselves in weakness
and victimization. I think it is necessary to understand how these behaviours
filter upwards and downwards, but without making any facile equivalence
between above and below. An individual who echoes oppressive behaviours he has
been trained in shares very little in common with an institution that can both
generate, model, and evolve those behaviours. Emphasizing that commonality can
be useful, with an indispensable caveat, in understanding how the system
works, but if we place our new understanding in a revolutionary framework —
with the desire to actually abolish these institutions — then this knowledge
points directly to the strategic necessity to undermine and sever this
commonality or identification with power, not to reinforce it.

The caveat is this: I think an honest, critical look at how power and
socialization work in this society makes it undeniable that, except in the
case of armed colonization or chattel slavery, oppressed people and privileged
people are equally tied into and socialized to identify with the functioning
of the system, even though their median experiences as groups are vastly
different. Oppressed people are not more outside of or less complicit in the
present system — they simply face a different, more frequently violent set of
inducements to participate. In other words, as an accurate generalization
lesbians, gays, and women help perpetuate and identify with patriarchy; and
people of color (with the possible exception of peoples still fighting against
colonization) help perpetuate white supremacist capitalism. I hope this
statement does not come off as insensitive to people whose struggles I
respect. I could quote the many radical women or people of color who have
argued the exact same thing, but this time I want to say it with my own voice,
because it is a truth that is evident to my own eyes, too.

To return to the question of micro power-dynamics, by equating them to macro
power-dynamics we acknowledge their prevalence but exaggerate their strength.
If we view oppressive/privileged socialization as determinant, as extremely
powerful over who we are, we risk making a mountain out of a mole hill. True,
a person who enacts oppressive behaviours is perpetuating the same power
dynamics as institutions like the media or the police, but by creating an
equivalence we blind ourselves to the fact that we are strong enough to
confront this person; in fact this should be relatively easy. We are currently
not strong enough to overcome the media or the police in the day to day,
except for a few fortuitous engagements, and it is this fact, this real — not
imagined — weakness, that must illuminate the path of struggle ahead: how to
build the collective force we need to attack and defeat these power
structures. This struggle does not come at the expense of understanding
interpersonal dynamics and relationships. In fact, fuck that dichotomy
entirely. There is no inside and outside. There is building healthy, caring
relationships, solid alliances, and networks of complicity and mutiny as we
wage war against a social system we could not identify with in the least,
because it is impossibly far away from who we want to be.

Looking at socialization with the old set of nuances, as a privileged person,
the conclusion is that the system privileges us, it has trained us, and this
will be the case for the rest of our natural lives. Someone who says she
doesn’t want to be privileged anymore is simply smiled at and told to read the
next few books on the reading list. I personally have no use for any theory or
practice that leaves out human agency, because powerlessness is always a
self-fulfilling prophesy.

## Allies like these

I admire those who work with non-anarchists and participate in non-homogenous
campaigns and struggles even though they don’t agree with everyone else
participating. But I think we all need to fiercely reject the Ally as a
primary identity of struggle. You cannot give solidarity if you are not
struggling first and foremost for your own reasons. To be only or primarily an
ally is to be a parasite on others’ struggles, with no hope greater than to be
a benign parasite; it is to refuse to acknowledge our interests and place in
the world out of a dogmatic insistence on identifying ourselves with the
system we are supposed to be fighting. Being aware of relative oppression and
privilege is vital, but emphasizing those differences over the fact that all
of us have common enemies and all of us have reasons to destroy the entire
system is deliberately missing opportunities to make ourselves stronger in
this fight.

Many partisans of an anti-oppression practice, including people I respect,
have simply stopped talking about revolution, and frequently no longer
identify as anarchists, at least “not openly.” They often characterize those
who do as naïve, privileged, isolated, sheltered from the consequences of
“real” revolutionary struggle. So talking about privilege has come, in many
cases, into direct conflict with talking about revolution. What are the
implications of this? Would this be an appropriate time to bring up that
Nietzsche quote about staring into the abyss?

A frequent justification I have heard is that anarchism has no currency in
their broader communities, and that so many anarchists they know are
privileged and empty-headed. This reasoning baffles me. If you come to believe
in total freedom, why would you abandon one of the only theoretical and
practical frameworks that espouses total freedom, just because so many others
don’t live up to the ideal?

If you’re for real, you don’t abandon the ideal to the hypocrites, you call
out the hypocrisy. (Speaking of hypocrisy, in my experience most of the people
who back off from anarchy for this reason still use the term “democracy” in a
good way, even though way more proponents of democracy are bastards than
anarchists who are bastards. Evidently they’re more comfortable associating
themselves with good politicians than with bad revolutionaries.)

I think in many cases the true reason for this disavowal is fear of failure,
lack of confidence in one’s own ideas, the need for affirmation through
working with those who are more oppressed and whose experiences thus seem more
real. The feeling of sophistication built into anti-oppression politics is an
effective shield against self-criticism. One can give up hope in the struggle,
which is a painful thing to carry around, without having to admit to personal
weakness or failure, by clinging on to and supporting struggles carried out by
people who one sees, in a hyper-alienated way, as more real.

It’s true enough that outside of certain cultural groups, not many people in
struggle identify as anarchists. However, those who insist on being allies
tend overwhelmingly to ally only with a certain portion of those others who
struggle: the portion that is most recognizable to an activist practice. Gangs
and prison rebels are usually ignored, while leftist organizations and NGOs
need never go wanting for volunteers. In other words, while justifying this
disavowal of or distancing from anarchy on the grounds of leaving comfort
zones, this is exactly what many anti-oppression activists refuse to do. After
all, visible activist organizations are the easiest form of resistance in
oppressed communities for activists with college degreees to find.

The fact that the job of these reformist allies is to recuperate resistance
leads to interesting contradictions. When black youth in Oakland rioted a few
days after the killing of Oscar Grant, aided and encouraged by an
embarrassingly small number of anarchists (black and white), the professional
activists in the black community working explicitly for the forces of order
denounced the uprising as the work of outside white anarchists. It was these
black leaders who were being racist, by silencing and erasing the black
anarchists who helped kick things off, and portraying the black youth as
misguided sheep manipulated by white people. By extension, the anti-oppression
activists who took up this rallying call for retreat were complicit in this
racist operation. Concerned with appearances and lacking confidence in their
own political analysis, they latched on to the most visible figureheads from
the black community (who, considering we live in a media-driven society, were
the most reformist) and parroted their line. The media, perceptive to the
effectiveness of this tactic, adopted it to preempt riots when the verdict of
Oscar Grant’s killer was announced, using guilt-laden language to portray all
the potential rioters as anarchists, and all the anarchists as white
outsiders. It worked. In order to be good allies, many white anarchists in the
Bay stayed home during the riots.

By privileging someone’s skin color over an affinity with their political
analysis when choosing alliances, anarchists are more likely to defend racism
rather than to challenge it, because at this point most people, regardless of
their color, have been trained to behave in a way that perpetuates the system.

## Trauma and Victimization

I am not heading towards the insulting and insensitive conclusion some
proponents of social war have made when I say that American anarchists are
those who talk most about trauma, and are also the most traumatized. Let’s not
go back to the days of stoic, emotionless revolutionary sacrifice. But let’s
also not ignore the massive failure represented by our trauma. Talking about
it, in the way we’ve been talking about it, just isn’t working.

A friend of mine hit the nail on the head when she said, “to heal from trauma,
you need to feel empowered.” The US anarchist movement exists within one of
the most disempowered political cultures in the world. It would be nothing
less than a narcissistic vanity of that very political culture to suggest the
all-too-common explanation that the State, the Spectacle, is simply stronger
in this country, and society simply weaker. In fact, the forces of order are
only stronger here because we’ve been losing for so long, and that losing
streak has long since manifested as analysis, as practice.

Seeing our socialization as more powerful than our wills leads to a number of
errors. The first is the belief in a pure body that exists before
socialization and has been irrevocably imprinted. In fact there is no body
without history, without relationships, with imprints from society. Because
the body is not and cannot be on a trajectory ideally towards, and therefore
practically away from, perfection, but is already imperfected, oppressive
socialization becomes just one stain among many, and we as persons become
mosaics of scars that, in sum, are really quite beautiful, and hella tough.

My privileged position in society notwithstanding, I’ve had more than
theoretical encounters with trauma, and I’ve found that I healed best when I
did not identify with the trauma or make an identity out of it. The most
dramatic reversal of a traumatic event came when I used violence against
someone who had successfully victimized me. This experience helped me to see
that it is not blaming the victim, but rather, good therapy, to focus on how
disempowerment is something we choose or reject, and how it can be reversed
through our own personal agency in a traumatic situation. Friends of mine who
have also healed from traumatic experiences have had similar observations.

## Fragile Freedom

One aspect of anti-oppression politics I find hardest to forgive is the idea
it has implicitly promoted that freedom is a fragile thing that we create
first in our own internal spaces. At a recent talk on identity politics at the
Seattle Anarchist Bookfair, one of the presenters told of a consent workshop
at an activist or anarchist space. He said it was a good, important workshop,
but he was struck by how limited that safe space was after they left, when a
female-bodied friend was harassed and threatened by a passing motorist as they
walked away.

Freedom has to go armed. Our notion of freedom can’t be something that falls
apart if every single person involved does not follow perfected norms of
consent. Such a notion, more than any of our fashions or specialized
vocabulary, will imprison us in a political ghetto. By trying to banish sexism
and heterosexism on the micro level, by perfecting behaviours and norms in our
circles of friends, we have made ourselves incapable of actually engaging with
and transforming those behaviours and norms outside of our cliques, and we
make it increasingly difficult for outsiders to come in, or for allies to work
with us. What we are left with are a series of fortresses, that are no less
plagued by gender violence for all our emphasis on new rules and processes, in
which we can either hide, fearing the days when we have to deal with outsiders
who will assign us to a gender category we don’t fit in, or from which we can
make violent forays, a lá Bash Back, to assault the fortresses of the normal.

I want to mention that I love the theoretical and tactical developments
represented by Bash Back; however one of their possible future trajectories is
a detente, a war of attrition, in which the bitterness of surrender is blunted
with the sweetness of vengeful attacks directed from an ideally
oppression-free internal space that can never expand or explode to include all
of society in a revolutionary way. A militant refusal to be assimilated, an
inability to sabotage assimilation in the rest of society, an admirable
dedication to the contiunation of this contradiction through attacks on church
services and gay businesses. I bring up Bash Back because within it are those
who are more closely aligned with a practice of social war and those more
closely aligned with an anti-oppression practice, and so which future
trajectory they follow is undecided. It is not a question of specific tactics
so much as projectuality. If our actions can facilitate revolutionary social
change only if more and more people join the in-group we have created, we will
never win.

## Fight Oppression, Burn the Witch

I first started to seriously doubt anti-oppression politics when I witnessed
what I realized was a typical response to criticism. Someone from outside the
movement was respectfully questioning whether there weren’t better ways to
fight sexism than using gendered speakers’ lists in meetings (ensuring that no
more than half of those who speak are men), and a white man well versed in
anti-oppression rhetoric responded dismissively and rudely, calling the
skeptic a sexist and giving him a list of recommended readings to study up on
so he could understand sexism better. “Read these first, then we’ll talk,” was
the tone of the reply. In this covertly academic framework, someone from the
outside can’t even properly be engaged with until they are brought up to the
appropriate level.

More recently, I witnessed a disgusting exchange that struck me and other
people as typical of other experiences we’d had. At the aforementioned
workshop at the Seattle bookfair, the presenters explicitly stated, multiple
times, that they think it is important to fight against racism, sexism,
homophobia, and other forms of oppression, and that they see nothing wrong
with people focusing on sexism, for example, or coming together as queer
people to fight against heterosexism. However, they criticized a number of
features of what they labeled “identity politics.” While they did not
successfully clarify what they meant by that, they gave precise criticisms of
specific analyses or paradigms during every step of their presentation.

Because they criticised the dominant paradigm for how to confront oppression,
the talk was highly controversial. Anti-oppression activists who were there
summarized the presentation thusly: “They said focusing on racism and sexism
or things like that only gets in the way of the struggle.” This is such an
inaccurate representation, if I didn’t know the people responsible for it I
would assume it was an intentional or malicious lie. The only other
possibility I can see is that the orthodoxy of anti-oppression politics makes
practitioners incapable of hearing criticism without assuming that their
critic is being oppressive.

One area APOC member, capitalizing on a racist police shooting that happened
around then to foreground the importance of identity, attacked the two
presenters, whom he characterized as a white woman and a half-latino man (thus
undermining the latter’s status as a person of color and thus reducing their
legitimacy within the anti-oppression paradigm, as part of the sadly common
game, Darker Than Thou). It would have been much easier if the two presenters
had been white males, but since they belonged to some oppressed categories
(never mind their class backgrounds), they had to be linked to white males in
some other way in order to ignore their actual critiques. So, these two were
turned into representatives of the anarchist group to which they supposedly
belonged. (Incidentally, its preference for representation was one of the
criticisms the two had of identity politics.)

That anarchist group, according to the APOCer, was comprised of majority men
and only one person of color (when in reality, the group doesn’t exist, but
the circle or scene he was confusing it with includes multiple people of
color, multiple women, and no majorities). In other words, to defend the
orthodox form of anti-racism, this person had to create the category
half-latino, turn several people of color into white people, and turn women
comrades into a sort of silenced minority. From his description, you’d think
the white male majority of this non-existent anarchist group had forced the
powerless, oppressed members of their group to publicly denounce identity
politics so they could stop thinking about privilege and get back to ruling
the movement. In the words of one of the workshop presenters, “I don’t feel
tokenized by the white anarchists in [my city] but I do feel it from you in
this caricature you portray.”

## Suppression

An emphasis on micro dynamics can be helpful within the framework I’m about to
elaborate, as an attentiveness to tactical details that can facilitate or
hinder our attacks on the system. But given how they’re nuanced by
anti-oppression activists, micro dynamics become a laundry list of behaviours
that are oppressive, or incompatible with freedom, which is to cast freedom as
a pure state that is banished by impure behaviours.

Within this framework for social change, the primary activity for creating
freedom is in fact suppression.

Because of this reliance on suppression and belief in the fragility of
freedom, women who talk loudly and don’t want to be put on a stack, don’t want
men to step back to make room for them, are called “manarchists.” Individual
personalities disappear under categorical generalizations, and such women are
told they are simply adopting masculine characteristics as a coping strategy.
Not being oppressive is boiled down to adopting a certain personality type
that, perhaps, is not so suited to revolutionary struggle: being soft spoken,
having thin skin, learning and following group norms, and submitting to group
process.

On the other hand I think building a culture of respect, solidarity, and
sensitivity is vital. In some ways, freedom exists more in the details than in
the abstract, and the details are different from one person to the next. This
is a truth that anti-oppression activists have helped to foreground. I don’t
at all want talking about micro power dynamics to go out of vogue, nor
discussion of our socialization and our personal experiences within social
settings. But maybe we should base our idea of freedom on an expectation of
constant confrontation which we are strong enough to deal with on our own and
with friends, rather than on an expectation of perfected norms that must be
upheld by the entire group.

Freedom is not a fragile thing. It is also not lacking in discomfort or
conflict, but these unpleasantries are exactly what we need to grow stronger,
and strength is what we need to create and defend freedom.

## Strategic Alliances

To talk primarily about social war rather than about privilege and oppression
is to acknowledge that capitalism, the State, patriarchy — all of these
interconnected systems — constitute a war against all of us, and each and
every one of us have a reason to fight this system. Our reasons and
capabilities are not the same, so we will never have a unified front. But we
have the possibility to seek alliances with nearly everyone else around us, to
undermine the consent and participation this system rests upon and shields
itself with, and to attack its exposed structures and symbols.

An analysis that focuses on privilege and oppression will encourage a primary
response, among oppressed people, that aims at challenging their exclusion
from the system more than their exploitation by it. Among privileged people,
the primary response is likely to be contemplative or educational.

An analysis that foregrounds social war will encourage a primary response of
offensive or defensive action from one’s unique position in society, coupled
with the seeking of subversive alliances. To start with, this is a far more
empowered and realistic practice, because each of us are the primary agents in
our own struggles, and each of us are declaring we are strong enough to fight
back. In order to be effective, we have to acquaint ourselves intimately with
the social terrain on which we struggle, which will lead to a similar
awareness of history, socialization, and power dynamics, but without the guilt
that accompanies the anti-oppression practice.

We recognize that the system privileges some of us, but this is something that
is imposed, and something we reject, rather than something we view as inhering
to us for the rest of our lives. Here’s an important distinction: you fight
something imposed on you. You take responsibility for something that belongs
to you. We did not create this system, and from now on we do not accept its
claims to us. Precisely because privilege is not something voluntary, it is
not something we can simply dismiss, but we recognize this as a result of
historical struggles, and a tactical reality on the battlefield.

It is no coincidence that whiteness was created at a time of major social
revolts in Europe and anti-colonial revolts in the Americas, at a time when
the ruling class needed ever greater participation in its project of
domination. Neither is it a coincidence that patriarchy experienced a
qualitative leap forward in that era. Much like higher wages, privileges of
gender and skin color are in fact concessions that have been won by past
struggles, but like all concessions, they were designed to weaken rebellion,
in this case by dividing it and encouraging greater portions of society to
identify with their rulers. But also like all concessions, they offer new
possibilities if we refuse to see them as a gift given to us, and instead view
them as weapons we have stolen.

People who are privileged by the system can feel guilty about this, or we can
use these privileges to attack the system. Those of us with white skin don’t
face as much attention from the police or store security. We could say,
therefore, that it’s a privilege to shoplift. Or we could rob those stores
blind, sell the merch, and donate the proceeds to our own struggles and the
struggles of people who can’t shoplift so easily. By using privilege as a
weapon rather than obsessing over it, we actually undermine it, because stores
that intentionally conduct racial profiling or more passively give in to the
common prejudices will be hurt economically. If they shift surveillance to
well dressed white shoppers, then white privilege, which helps prevent
rebellion, erodes a little.

By seeing race not as essential categories or forms of socialization we have
to own up to, but as counterrevolutionary alliances that never succeed in
negating our own agency, the Phoenix Class War Council achieved a victory of a
magnitude I’ve never seen come out of privilege workshops. They approached
white libertarians who generally remained within right wing coalitions, and
called on them to honor their own principles by joining them in a protest
against neo-nazis who were capitalizing on anti-immigrant racism with a
xenophobic rally. The libertarians showed up, and helped drive the nazis out
of town. Subsequently, the Phoenix anarchists intervened again, and called on
the white libertarians to stand true to their opposition to big government by
joining them in a protest against the militarization of the borders, which was
also an immigrant solidarity protest. Many of them came out, mutinying against
the alliances of white supremacy. (One might argue that this momentum was
largely destroyed by the leftist Boycott Arizona campaign, which had a watered
down politics, was based on shaming and guilt, and gave all Arizona citizens,
i.e. from the nazis to the libertarians, cause to unite).

With this different nuancing, being a good ally means fighting for your own
reasons, unapologetically, and familiarizing yourself with your capabilities
as compared with the capabilities of your allies, looking for ways to
acknowledge these differences but make them complementary. What’s required,
above all, is finding allies who actually share affinity with you, while
breaking up the alliances that protect the system. This means working in
broader campaigns, without a haughty and insular disdain for “leftists,” but
also without the dishonest and hypocritical suppression of one’s own political
identity, one’s own reasons for struggling (which has become second nature for
the hundreds of anarchists who work in other people’s campaigns and parrot
social democratic rhetoric rather than openly expressing their own ideas and
radical critiques).

Too many anti-authoritarians serve as the supporters and shock troops for
reformist campaigns that can only humanize the prison system, the borders, the
War on Terror, when what we must do is speak openly about the need to abolish
these things, and look for ways that our participation in these campaigns can
open revolutionary paths rather than following reformist dead-ends. If we
don’t have our own reasons for hating the border, are we offering any more
than charity by taking part in a campaign to soften it? And what are we
admitting about the depth of our alliances when we don’t talk openly about the
need for a world with no borders? How much do we truly respect the people we
are working with if we’re hiding our actual dreams and motivations from them?

Experience in other places has shown that by being an uncompromising force,
saying the things no one else would say, and militantly pushing the envelope,
after the initial conflicts and arguments other people will come to appreciate
anarchist solidarity because our presence gives strength to a struggle, much
the same way that most of Martin Luther King. Jr.‘s reformist victories can be
chalked up to those who fought more forcefully for something more radical.

In other words, the pragmatic arguments about the immediacy of human suffering
in certain struggles, and the need to approach those timidly, fall short,
because by silencing our radical critique, we ensure that reformism and
recuperation will maintain the problem indefinitely, and by not manifesting a
threatening force we ensure that the system will have little motivation to
decrease the human suffering in the short term.

It deserves to be mentioned that one of the largest amnesties for illegal
immigrants in recent decades, that was not lobbied for by business interests,
happened in Greece, after anarchists and others violently and uncompromisingly
rose up against all aspects of the system of domination, and immigrants took
part in that uprising. Despite being the most vulnerable or at risk, they were
frequently the most violent and reckless, once the humanitarian, reformist
leadership who generally mediated their rage was proven obsolete.

By coming out of the closet, anarchists can discover who our real allies are.
Among the leftists, we can distinguish the politicians from the sincere ones,
and we can set a tone of radical direct action that makes it easier for people
in more precarious positions to come out in support of that approach. By
speaking about the abolition of borders and prisons and the State and creating
a material force in society, with its creative/supportive and
negative/destructive aspects, we make those radical ideas a real possibility
and create an exit from the timeless cycles of guilt, reform, recuperation,
and identification with the very system that makes living impossible for all
of us.

# Suggestions for real solidarity

Let’s pick a real life situation. A US city, a protest against the police in
the wake of yet another shooting. Among the small crowd, there’s a group of
homeless youth, some anarchists in a black bloc, and others. There are no
politicians here, no counterrevolutionaries, just various people with
differing reasons to participate, all of them sincere. Many of the people
don’t know one another, however; it’s something like the coincidence of
separate islands, and when they go their separate ways, few if anyone has met
a stranger or made a new friend.

At one point, someone tries to pull at least two of the homeless youth into
the street, where the black bloc are blocking traffic. Many if not most of the
people do not notice this incident. This upsets the homeless youth, as they
have decided to stay on the sidewalks for their own safety; they have no
shortage of opportunities to confront the police. Despite this show of
disrespect, at the end of the protest they talk about having had an
overwhelmingly positive experience standing up to the police and starting
long-lasting conversations about police violence.

Later, an argument develops between anarchists or anti-authoritarians, some of
whom who identify more closely with a practice of identity politics or
anti-oppression, others who identify more closely with a practice of
insurrection or social war. The same old arguments come out. “The black bloc
tried to force people into the streets, they endangered people with their
tactics.” “They were being fucked up.” “They’re just privileged,” “straight
white men” etc. Even though not the black bloc but one person was involved in
pulling, and the black bloc was neither all white nor all male, and possibly
did not include any straight people at all. And even though some people who
later made these arguments saw the pulling going on and didn’t intervene, they
just blamed others for it.

And on the other side: “I call bullshit,” “that’s just identity politics,”
“they’re just trying to pacify our response,” “they claimed the black bloc was
endangering people just by taking the streets,” even though it wasn’t about
taking the streets but someone trying to force others to do so, and someone
within their friendship circle reported hearing about the pulling incident
directly from the mouths of two of the homeless youth.

Two well known games make communication impossible: the privilege game, and
the more-militant-than-thou game. In the first, any unorthodox idea about how
to confront oppression is said to be a product of privilege, and an attempt to
preserve oppressive dynamics. In the second, any criticism of a militant or
illegal action is said to be a move towards reformism and pacification.

It seems clear that these boxes and arguments exist primarily to rescue us
from complicated situations: confronting disrespectful behaviours rather than
just denouncing them, or feeling judged by those carrying out more risky
actions, on the one hand; and on the other, taking criticisms seriously and
humbly, and understanding and supporting other people’s tactics.

I think everyone is tired of the dichotomy between negation and creation. It’s
cliché for anti-authoritarians these days to admit that we need to tear some
shit down and build other stuff up. We’re not all on the same page, and
there’s still worthwhile debates to be had around nihilism; the idea of
alternatives, blueprints, and processes versus communes, visions, and
capacities; but hopefully we can all see that there are plenty of people on
the other side of these debates who, even if they are making a real strategic
mistake, are struggling sincerely and have their hearts in the same place as
ours, which is often more important, because it’s much easier to see a
strategic mistake than to actually be right about it; therefore
excommunicating everyone we believe to be guilty of strategic mistakes is more
likely to result in hyper-fragmented sectarianism than in good, effective
strategies put into practice.

It should also be easy to see that so much of these arguments is a question of
temperament. Some people prefer acts of creation, healing, and support; others
prefer acts of negation, destruction, and attack. This is great, because we
need it all.

So what would real solidarity, and a real diversity of tactics look like? The
first step is to abolish any hierarchy of tactics. The riskier and more
exciting tactics are not the most important ones, and not the only ones
deserving direct support.

We’ve had to put up with authoritarian, reformist pacifists controlling
protest marches for so long, that it becomes easy to view a protest march or
some other manifestation of a social movement as just a tool, a cover to get
our riot on. But we have no hope of subverting the control of the
institutionalized Left and forming real relationships of solidarity with a
broad network of people in struggle if we hold on to this arrogant,
utilitarian view.

In the protest I mention above, not only the black bloc but all the people
present deserved direct support for the type of involvement they chose. The
less militant were not simply the bottom of a pyramid holding up the more
militant. As someone who works at a drop-in center with those homeless youth
put it, for some people present it was revolutionary to take the streets or
attack the police; and for the homeless youth it was revolutionary to take a
public stand against the police and yell at them, because of how different
this power dynamic is from their everyday experience. Risk is different for
every person involved, based on their standing in various social hierarchies.
Oppressed people are not fragile, vulnerable, or unable to participate in
dangerous, violent resistance, as many spokespeople of anti-oppression
politics have claimed, again and again, implicitly and explicitly. However,
different people do face different choices in the exact same situations, and
we all need to be aware of that.

I want to go back to the idea that it was “revolutionary” for those folks to
simply yell at the police. This is true insofar as it gives them a sense of
their own power. Many people might scoff at the limited scope of this
“revolutionary” victory, but we should consider that riots are often claimed
as minor victories on the basis of how they make people feel. This should not
be underestimated: if we feel weak and demoralized, we will never win.

No single tactic should ever be expected, on repetition, to lead to
revolution. Every successful tactic simply opens new doors, that require other
tactics in order to walk through. Homeless kids yelling at the police
undoubtedly open a door that leads in the right direction. Being able to fight
the police and beat them in the streets is a subsequent door through which all
revolutionary struggles must be able to pass. The simple act of yelling at
police can be claimed as revolutionary, but only if we are willing to build
off of what is won and look for the next steps that lead to a social
transformation that actually deserves the name “revolution.”

Those who are participating in less combative forms of struggle can help end
this divide by more vocally supporting combative actions. Repression works by
dividing the struggle, and those who focus on more creative or short-term
organizing often help this process of isolation occur. On the other hand,
those who focus on the more destructive side of the struggle often ensure
their own isolation by disrespecting the work of their potential allies.

The work of supporting prisoners, supporting other people in struggle,
communicating and building relationships with other groups, and making
anarchist critiques and projects visible is as important and as heroic as
sabotage and street fights. Insurrections themselves consist of all of these,
not just the latter, more obvious acts.

People who work in the community can help build a real culture of struggle if
they do not fall into the trap of pragmatism, if they risk frightening some
potential allies by vocally and visibly valuing revolutionary struggles.
People who fight in the streets can undermine alienation by building
relationships with those who do not participate in such forms of struggle, and
by more vocally appreciating and honoring support work and creative forms of
struggle. And those who feel inclined can engage in both creative and
destructive forms of struggle, erasing a line that should never have been
drawn.

With all this in mind, here are some suggestions for developing real
solidarity:

-   Study your situation, to understand in what ways the system oppresses you,
    in what ways it tries to buy you off, and how other people around you may
    face a different situation.

-   Make alliances with those you can work best with based on your own goals,
    and be upfront about those goals.

-   Maintain connections with people who think and struggle differently.

-   Especially for white people and men, actively subvert the alliances that
    induce privileged people to be loyal to the system.

-   For those with more access to resources, spread those resources to people
    in struggle who have less access.

[^1]: Craig Calhoun (1994), *Social Theory and the Politics of Identity*,
    p.13, pp.28–29. The Jarach article I refer to is “Essentialism and
    Identity Politics” in Anarchy 26 Magazine no.58, 2004.
