% How To Drop Out
% Ran Prieur
% 2004

## Original 2004 essay

I didn't even start dropping out until my mid-20's. Unlike many outsiders and
“radicals,” I never had to go through a stage where I realized that our whole
society is insane — I've known that as long as I can remember. But even being
already mentally outside the system, I found it extremely challenging to get
out physically. In fourth grade I wanted to blow up the school, but I didn't
know how, and even if I had done it, it would not have meant an endless summer
vacation. In high school, inspired by Bill Kaysing's *The Robin Hood
Handbook*, I wanted to go live off the land in the Idaho wilderness, but
actually doing it seemed as remote and difficult as going to the moon.
(Kaysing later wrote the book *We Never Went to the Moon*.) So I continued to
bide my time and obey the letter of the law, like the guy in the Kafka
parable[^1]. In college, when Artis the Spoonman performed on campus and told
us all to drop out, I thought that was ridiculous — how would I survive
without a college degree?

A few years later, with my two college degrees, after jobs operating
envelope-stuffing machinery and answering phones in a warehouse, I was finally
nudged toward dropping out by the Bush I recession and my own nature — that
I'm extremely frugal, love unstructured time, and would sooner eat garbage
than feign enthusiasm. More than ten years later I'm a specialist at eating
garbage — as I draft this I'm eating a meal I made with organic eggs from a
dumpster, and later I'll make a pie of dumpstered apples. I live on under
$2000 a year, I have no permanent residence, and moving to the Idaho
wilderness now seems like a reachable goal — but no longer the best idea.

Getting free of the system is more complex than we've been led to believe.
Here as in so many places, our thinking has been warped by all-or-nothingism,
by the Hollywood myth of the sudden overwhelming victory: Quit your corporate
job this minute, sell all your possessions, and hop a freight train to a straw
bale house in the mountains where you'll grow all your own food and run with
the wolves! In reality, between the extremes there's a whole dropout universe,
and no need to hurry.

In my case, as I understood what I had to go through to make money, I stopped
spending it. I learned to make my meals from scratch, and then from cheaper
scratch, making my own sourdough bread and tortillas. I stopped buying music
and books (exceptions in exceptional cases) and got in the habit of using the
library. When I crashed my car, I kept the insurance money and walked, and
then got an old road bike. I took a road trip by hitchhiking, but it was too
physically taxing and I got sick. Like many novice radicals, I got puritanical
and pushed myself too hard, and finally eased off. I temporarily owned another
car and lived in it for a couple months of a long road trip. In the Clinton
economic bubble, I got a job that was much easier and better paying than my
previous jobs, and built up savings that I'm still living on.

The main thing I was doing during those years was de-institutionalizing
myself, learning to navigate the hours of the day and the thoughts in my head
with no teacher or boss telling me what to do. I had to learn to relax without
getting lethargic, to never put off washing the dishes, to balance the needs
of the present and the future, to have spontaneous fun but avoid addiction, to
be intuitive, to notice other people, to make big and small decisions. I went
through mild depression and severe fatigue and embarrassing obsessions and
strange diets and simplistic new age thinking. It's a long and ugly road, and
most of us have to walk it, or something like it, to begin to be free.

A friend says, “This world makes it easy to toe the line, and easy to totally
fuck up, and really hard to not do either one.” But this hard skill, not
quitting your job or moving to the woods or reducing consumption or doing art
all day, is the essence of dropping out. When people rush it, and try to take
shortcuts, they slide into addiction or debt or depression or shattered
utopian communities, and then go back to toeing the line.

The path is different for everyone. Maybe you're already intuitive and
decisive and know how to have fun, but you don't know how to manage money or
stay grounded. Maybe you're using wealth or position or charm to keep from
having to relate to people as equals, or you're keeping constantly busy to
avoid facing something lurking in the stillness. Whatever weaknesses keep you
dependent on the system, you have to take care of them before you break away
from the system, just as you have to learn to swim before you escape a ship.
How? By going out and back, a little farther each time, with persistence and
patience, until you reach the skill and distance that feels right.

At the moment there's no reason to drop out “all the way” except puritanism. I
hate civilization as much as anyone, but in these last few years before it
crashes, we should appreciate and use what it offers. Sylvan Hart (his given
name!), the 20th century mountain man who even smelted his own metal, still
traded with civilization, and once carried a sheet of glass 50 miles through
the woods so he could have a good window. (See Harold Peterson, *The Last of
the Mountain Men*)

Some of the happiest people I know have dropped out only a short distance.
They still live in the city and have jobs and pay rent, but they've done
something more mentally difficult — and mentally liberating — than moving to
some isolated farm. They have become permanently content with low-status,
modest-paying jobs that they don't have to think about at home or even half
the time when they're at work. Yes, these jobs are getting scarce, but they're
still a thousand times more plentiful than the kind of job that miserable
people cannot give up longing for — where you make a living doing something so
personally meaningful that you would do it for free.

“Do what you love and the money will follow” is an irresponsible lie, a denial
of the deep opposition between money and love. The real rule is: “If you're
doing what you love, you won't care if you never make a cent from it, because
that's what love means — but you still need money!” So what I recommend, as
the second element of dropping out, is coldly severing your love from your
income. One part of your life is to make only as much money as you need, at a
job that you can come home from feeling energized and not drained. And then
the important part of your life is to do just exactly what you love, with zero
pressure to make money. And if you're lucky, you'll eventually make money
anyway.

But how much money do you “need”? And what if the only jobs available are
low-paying and so exhausting that you come home and collapse into bed? These
questions lead to my own level of dropping out, which is to reduce expenses to
the point that you shift your whole identity from the high-budget to the
low-budget universe.

In a temperate climate, you have only five physical needs: food, water,
clothing, shelter, and fuel. (If you're a raw-foodist and don't mind the cold,
you don't even need fuel!) Everything else that costs money is a luxury or a
manufactured need. Manufactured needs have fancy names: entertainment,
transportation, education, employment, housing, “health care.” In every case
these are creations of, and enablers of, an alienating and dominating system,
a world of lost wholeness.

If you love your normal activities, you don't need to tack on “entertainment.”
If you aren't forced to travel many miles a day, you don't need
“transportation.” If you are permitted to learn on your own, you don't need
“education.” If you can meet all your physical needs through the direct action
of yourself and your friends, you don't need to go do someone else's work all
day. If you're permitted to merely occupy physical space and build something
to keep the wind and rain out, you don't need to pay someone to “provide” it.
Expensive health care is especially insidious: not only is our toxic and
stressful society the primary cause of sickness, but the enormous expenses
that have been added in the last hundred years are mostly profit-making scams
that cause and prolong sickness far more than they heal it.

This is the low-budget universe: I ride around the city on an old cheap road
bike, in street clothes, often hauling food I've just pulled out of a
dumpster. Sometimes I'll be on a trail where I'll invariably be passed by
people on thousand dollar bikes in racing outfits. Why are they riding around
if they're not carrying anything? And why are they in such a hurry?

I used to be envious of those suckers: I *have* to ride my bike to survive and
they're so rich they do it for fun. But what is this “fun”? I get everything —
exercise, getting from place to place, meaningfulness, the feeling of
autonomy, and doing what's necessary to survive — all with the same activity:
riding my bike. They should be envious of me: my life is elegant and theirs is
disjointed and self-defeating, making money which they have to turn around and
spend on unhealthful restaurant food because they don't have time to cook, on
cars because they have too many obligations to get around by bicycle, and then
on bicycles or health club memberships to make up for sitting in their jobs
and cars all day, and even then on medical “insurance” (a protection racket
which for most people costs more than uninsured care — or there would be no
profit in it) for when their fragmented poisonous life makes them sick.

How do you get out of this? One step at a time! Move or change jobs so you
don't need a car, and then sell the damn thing. Get a bicycle and learn to fix
it yourself — it's not even 1% as difficult and expensive as fixing a car.
Reduce your possessions and you'll find that the fewer you have, the more you
appreciate each one. Get your clothing at thrift stores on sale days — I spend
less than $20 a year on clothes. Give up sweetened drinks — filtered water is
less than 50 cents a gallon and much better for you. If you have an expensive
addiction, pull yourself out of it or at least trade it for a cheap one.

Probably the most valuable skill you can learn is cooking. For a fraction of
the cost of white-sugar-white-starch-hydrogenated-oil restaurant meals, you
can make your own meals out of high quality healthful ingredients, and if
you're a good cook, they'll taste good. I eat better than anyone I know on
$100 a month: butter, nuts, dates, whole wheat flour, brown rice, olive oil,
all organic, and bee pollen for extra vitamins. From natural food store
dumpsters I get better bread, produce, meat, and eggs than Safeway even sells,
but if this is impossible in your city, or you'd just prefer not to, you can
still eat beautifully on $200.

The foundation of all this is to cultivate intense awareness of money. It
doesn't grow on trees but you have millions of years of biological memory of a
world where what you want *does* grow on trees, so you need to constantly
remind yourself that whatever you're thinking of buying will cost you an hour,
ten hours, 100 hours of dreary humiliating labor. Your expenses are your
chains. Reducing them is not about punishing yourself or avoiding guilt — it's
about getting free.

If you continue to reduce expenses, eventually you'll come to the proverbial
elephant in the parlor, the single giant expense that consumes 50–80% of a
frugal person's money, enough to buy a small extravagant luxury every day. Of
course, it's rent, or for you advanced slaves, mortgage. The only reason you
can't just go find a vacant space and live there, the only reason another
entity can be said to “own” it and require a huge monthly payment from whoever
lives there, is to maintain a society of domination, to continually and
massively redistribute influence (symbolized by money) from the powerless to
the powerful, so the powerless are reduced to groveling for the alleged
privilege of wage labor, doing what the powerful tell them in exchange for
tokens which they turn around and pass back toward the powerful every month
and think it's natural. Rent is theft and slavery, and mortgage is just as
bad, based not only on the myth of “owning” space but also on the contrived
custom of “interest,” simply a command to give money (influence) to whoever
has it and take it from whoever lacks it.

Fortunately there are still a lot of ways to dodge rent/mortgage other than
refusing to pay or leave and being killed by the police. For surprisingly
little money you can buy remote or depleted land and build a house on it. (see
*Mortgage Free!* by Rob Roy, and also *Finding and Buying Your Place in the
Country* by Les Scher) If you don't mind starting over with strangers, you can
join an existing dropout community.[^2] You can live in a van, camp in the
woods, or look for a caretaker or apartment manager job. If you're charming,
you can find a partner or spouse who will “support” you by permitting you to
sleep and cook someplace without asking for money. And if you're bold or
desperate, most cities have abandoned houses or buildings where you can squat.
Mainly all you need are neighbors oblivious to your coming and going, a
two-burner propane camp stove, some water jugs and candles, and a system for
disposing of your bodily waste. If the “owners” come, they'll probably just
ask you to leave, and in some places there are still archaic laws from
compassionate times, making it legally difficult for them to evict you.

I squatted a shed for two weeks in December 2002 and if necessary I'll do it
again. Also I have enough money saved to buy cheap land — the project is just
too big for me to do alone. Also I'm slowly learning wilderness survival —
which is iffy since wilderness itself is not surviving. But I spend most of my
time surfing housesits and staying with friends and family.

To drop out is to become who you are. Do not feel guilty about using strengths
and advantages that others do not have. That guilt is a holdover from the
world of selfish competition, where your “success” means the failure or
deprivation of someone else. In the dropout universe, your freedom feeds the
freedom of others — it's as if we've all been tied up, and the most agile and
loosely tied people get out first, and then help the rest.

But what if they don't? What about people who are outside the system but still
hyper-selfish? These people are not what I call “dropouts” but what I call
“idiots.” The view of this world as a war of all against all, where your
purpose in life is to accumulate “wealth,” zero-sum advantages and scarce
resources for an exclusive “self,” is the view of the elite. The only reason
to think that way is if you are one of the handful of people in a position to
win. For everyone else, the value system that makes sense is that you are here
to help, to serve the greatest good that you can perceive. Yet in America,
rich and poor alike are raised with robber baron consciousness, to turn us
against each other, to keep us exploiting those below us instead of resisting
our own exploiters, to keep all the arrows going the right way in the
life-depleting machine.

The frugality that I'm talking about is the *opposite* of ungenerosity,
because it frees us from a scarcity-based system in which we cannot afford to
be generous. For all our lives we've been trained as prostitutes, demanding
money in exchange for services that we should be giving free to those we love,
because others demand the same of us. In this context, the dropout is a hero
and a virus: if you no longer need money, you can give others what they need
without asking for money, and then they no longer need money, and so on. In
practice it's still sketchy because there are so few of us, but the more of us
there are, and the more skills and goods and openings we offer, the better our
gift economy will work. And if we do it right, they won't be able to just
massacre us or put us in camps, as they've always done before, because we will
have too many friends and relations in the dominant system.

For strategy I look not to political movements like revolts or strikes or
radical parties, but to cultural movements like gay liberation or feminism or
pagan spirituality. First define a clearly understood identity, then proudly
claim that identity, then build public acceptance through entertainment and by
each of us earning the support of friends and family outside the movement. I'm
envious of gay people — I've spent years mastering written language just to
halfway explain myself, and all they have to say is “I'm gay.”

If we had a word, what would it be? In a recent family bulk Christmas mailing,
I was “living the bohemian lifestyle,” but I don't go to poetry readings or
hang out in coffee shops. “Anarchist” smacks of ideology, of people who bicker
endlessly about abstract theory, although maybe we could adopt an insulting
term used by theory anarchists, and call ourselves “lifestyle anarchists.”
“Voluntary simplicity” is too tame and politically correct, suggesting aging
yuppies trying to save the world by reducing households to one car — plus the
life I advocate is not at all simple, just unstressful. I'm too politically
ambitious and forward-looking to be a hobo or a tramp. In Eastern tradition I
could be respected as some kind of monk or holy man, but I don't want to get
“enlightened” — I want to make the whole world wild and free.

The word I've been using, “dropout,” is a good start but it has the same deep
flaw as “primitive”: it places our dominating, parasitic, and temporary
civilization in the fixed center. We've got it inside out. On the physical
plane, nature is the center that holds, and “mainstream” society is the
falling apart, the irresponsible life-wasting deviance. What I'm trying to do
— and what we're all going to have to do in the next few decades if we survive
at all — is drop back in.

### Related Links

-   Audio of me reading “How to Drop Out” (thanks Avi):
    [[http://www.archive.org/details/HowToDropOutByRanPrieur](http://www.archive.org/details/HowToDropOutByRanPrieur)

-   Belorussian translation of “How To Drop Out” by Galina Miklosic:
    [[http://webhostinggeeks.com/science/dropout-be](http://webhostinggeeks.com/science/dropout-be)

-   Early Retirement Extreme:
    [http://earlyretirementextreme.com/frequently-asked-questions](http://earlyretirementextreme.com/frequently-asked-questions)

-   Chris Davis's Idle Theory:
    [http://idletheory.info/](http://idletheory.info/)

-   The Idle Foundation:
    [http://idlefoundation.org](http://idlefoundation.org)

-   A 2009 article about a German woman who has lived without money for 13
    years:
    [http://women.timesonline.co.uk/tol/life\_and\_style/women/article6928744.ece](http://women.timesonline.co.uk/tol/life_and_style/women/article6928744.ece)

-   Moneyless World, a blog by a guy who has been living without money since
    2000: [http://zerocurrency.blogspot.com](http://zerocurrency.blogspot.com)

-   A page about master dropout Jeffrey Sawyer:
    [http://web.archive.org/web/20080105001815/http://carfreeuniverse.org/Members/jeffreysawyer/livinginquiry](http://web.archive.org/web/20080105001815/http://carfreeuniverse.org/Members/jeffreysawyer/livinginquiry)

-   My own list of books to drop out with:
    [http://ranprieur.com/misc/books.html\#dropout](http://ranprieur.com/misc/books.html#dropout)

### Appendix 1: Having Kids

For very young people there are also two universes. Squatting over a tub of
warm water is a much cheaper and healthier way to give birth than lying on
your back in a harsh hospital room where the high priest will take the infant
away from the mother to teach it alienation. Then you can buy a stroller and a
crib (more alienation practice) and expensive baby food, or do like most
nature-based peoples and carry your baby against your body and breast-feed it
for the first three to four years[^3]. You can send it to day care (practice
for later institutions) so you can go to your job that pays only slightly more
than day care costs, or you can raise the kid yourself. And the idea that a
kid needs a “nice” upper-middle-class-style physical environment is worse than
false. A “dirty” environment strengthens the immune system, and if I were a
toddler again, I'd much rather live in a cool abandoned house or junkyard or
shack in the woods than in a sterile room with a television where I wasn't
allowed to touch anything.

The little problem here is that raising kids with dropout values is marginally
illegal, and you risk having them kidnapped and reprogrammed by the
authorities — the same as they did to the Indians.

And the big problem is that, while the financial requirements for having kids
are completely artificial, the mental/emotional requirements are real and more
difficult than we can imagine if we haven't tried it. To “raise the kid
yourself” must be something like three full-time jobs that you can't quit. The
mother needs at least one other person capable of taking care of all her needs
so she can devote full attention to the child, and ideally she needs a whole
“tribe.” Babies are super-adaptable — it's the mother who needs a level of
comfort and stability that's hard to achieve without money — and a level of
emotional health that's hard to achieve *with* money. Otherwise the baby will
adapt itself for compatibility with a hostile, empty, stressed-out hell-world.

I'd love to have a couple kids, but I won't do it without a physical location
that's owned and paid for, and without someone besides myself to help out the
mother, and without the means to dodge the institutions, whether through
excellent legal help or through the institutions breaking down.

> *(Thanks Ursa for suggesting the topic!)*

### Appendix 2: Dumpster Diving FAQ

(A “dumpster,” by the way, is the American word for the big metal garbage bin
that is called a “skip” in the UK and Australia. Also it's been a few years
since I wrote this, and now I do almost no dumpster diving because I'm based
in Spokane where all the stores have trash compactors. I still check my
favorites when I visit Seattle, but even there the best ones have dried up,
either because they're being picked clean or because the stores are donating
elsewhere.)

Why do they call it “diving”? Do you go in head first?
  ~ Usually I don't have to climb in at all. I can just reach in, or climb up
    on the side of the dumpster and reach, or balance on my hips on the edge
    and lean down in, using my legs as a counterweight, which might be where
    “diving” comes from. And sometimes I do climb in, but not if it's too
    nasty.

What kind of stuff to you get out of dumpsters?
  ~ I mostly dive for high quality natural food, which is a rare
    specialization. There are far more people who dive for nonperishable
    items.

Isn't all the food rotten?
  ~ Certainly not! You would be amazed at the quality of food that gets thrown
    away, and the reasons. As I draft this I'm making soup with a can of
    coconut milk that was thrown away for having a dent. This morning I had
    cereal that was thrown away for a tear in the box, even though the inner
    plastic bag was intact. Often produce gets thrown out for purely cosmetic
    reasons, like a funny-shaped bell pepper or an apple with a rough patch of
    skin. My favorite dumpster is at a store that sells produce in packages
    instead of by the pound. If a single orange is moldy, they'll throw out
    the whole five pound bag. They'll throw out basil for a few brown-edged
    leaves, and I'll make a huge batch of pesto. Once I found several cases of
    organic chicken broth that were tossed for no apparent reason. Also most
    stores are very conservative with their expiration dates, so I can get
    meat, eggs, cheese, and packaged meals that are still fine.

You eat *meat* from the dumpster?
  ~ Usually only organic meat, because the normal stuff is full of poisons.
    But yes, if you get it quickly, decay is not an issue. A few times I
    pulled out slimy salmon carcasses from which they had cut off the filets.
    The part that was left still had a lot of meat plus all the good healthy
    fat!

Do you ever get sick?
  ~ I have yet to get food poisoning from dumpster food, except once I got
    mild nausea and some sulfurous burps from (I think) some smoked salmon.
    The key is knowing about how different foods go bad. Poultry has
    salmonella, so it has to be thoroughly cooked and you have to avoid
    getting any uncooked juices in your mouth. Never eat a dead crab — but
    once I took a chance on one that was still packed in ice, and I was fine.
    When I get sushi from the dumpster, I cook it even if it's intended to be
    eaten raw. Eggs are good *way* past their expiration date. Fruit mold is
    toxic but bread mold is safe. Puffy canned food will kill you, but a puffy
    carton of apple juice is better than fresh! It helps that I live in a
    chilly city, and that I have a strong immune system, and that my diet is
    generally very healthy. I suspect that the top cause of food-borne illness
    is refined sugar weakening people's immune systems.

What are some foods you've rescued from a dumpster?
  ~ Apples, oranges, bananas, pears, peaches, strawberries, tomatoes,
    avocados, pineapples, eggplants, yams, bell peppers, zucchinis, asparagus,
    ginger, onions, potatoes, lettuce, spinach, arrugula, basil, eggs,
    sausage, beef, lamb, chicken, salmon, breaded halibut, hazelnuts, pecans,
    lentils, wild rice, salsa, guacamole, chips, pesto, olives, bread,
    croissants, chocolate, butter, coffee.

What's the best thing you've ever found?
  ~ Probably a whole case of extra-virgin olive oil. Or (because it's so rare
    and tasty) three packages of Niman Ranch bacon. Another time I found about
    40 packages of smoked salmon. It's always great to find a bag of premium
    organic bread. The coolest thing I've heard about was a block of chocolate
    so big that when they got it home they had to break it up with an axe!

If you find a lot of something good, do you take it all?
  ~ Not if I know that other people hit the same dumpster. I took only four
    bottles of the olive oil and gave two away. My rule is, take up to half,
    unless I think no one will come along later who wants it.

Any other dumpster diving ethics?
  ~ Don't leave a mess, and if others have left a mess, clean it. Messes give
    us a bad name and give the stores a reason to lock us out. Also, if I dig
    down and find something good that I don't want, I'll pull it to the top
    for the next person. In some cases I'll pull stuff out and set it to the
    side, so it will still be there after the dumpster is emptied.

Besides food, what good dumpsters are there?
  ~ Anything that is manufactured, there are seconds and rejects that get
    thrown away. Somewhere there is a violin dumpster, a felt hat dumpster, an
    ice cream dumpster. Businesses that use the latest computer equipment
    usually just throw it away every time they replace it. You just have to
    find out where. I know people who have found good outdoor equipment and
    expensive clothing in manufacturer dumpsters. Also there are beer
    dumpsters! If a bottle gets broken, they throw out the whole case. I don't
    do this level of dumpster diving, because you generally need a car to
    navigate the spread-out industrial areas and to haul all the stuff you
    find.

Are dumpsters often locked?
  ~ Less often than you'd think. And it's not necessarily to keep people from
    taking stuff out. More often it's to keep people from putting stuff in.

Do you have to go late at night?
  ~ Not always! I go to my favorite food dumpsters in the mid-morning. Daytime
    is ideal for many dumpsters because you can see better and you look less
    suspicious. But clearly, if it's a manufacturer dumpster in plain view of
    the workplace, you have to wait until everyone goes home.

What's a dumpster diver's worst enemy?
  ~ Trash compactors, big sealed-off things that you can't get into. They can
    be disassembled, but be careful, because if there is compacted stuff
    inside, it tends to explode. You might become a suicide trash liberator.
    Another enemy is the irresponsible dumpster diver who makes a mess. People
    who scavenge cans are the worst.

Is dumpster diving illegal?
  ~ This is a difficult question. The laws are complex and vary from place to
    place. A few years ago, two guys got six months in jail for dumpster
    diving[^4] vegetables, even though the business owners did not want to
    press charges. That's an exceptional case, but it's possible. So be
    careful! In any case, do not act guilty. Act like what you're doing is
    perfectly normal and legal.

Do you look in residential trash?
  ~ Never in house garbage cans — it's rude, risky, and there's probably
    nothing there. But apartment dumpsters can be excellent. People throw out
    good blankets and pillows, small furniture, cookware, appliances,
    electronics, sporting equipment, books, CD's. Once I snagged a perfectly
    good upright vacuum cleaner that someone threw away because the disposable
    inner bag had a hole. Even better are dumpsters for college dorms or other
    student housing at the end of the term when everyone's moving out. Rich
    kids will throw away items worth hundreds of dollars.

So do you ever sell stuff you find?
  ~ That violates my personal moral code, which is that it's wrong to sell
    something for more than I paid for it. Did Robin Hood steal from the rich
    and *sell* to the poor? If I siphon off stuff that other dumpster divers
    need for personal use, and then sell it, that's stealing from the poor and
    selling cheap to the rich! If you can't even give away something for free
    that you *got* for free, you have misplaced your soul.

### Appendix 3: Frequently Posted Criticisms

Isn't it hypocritical to use the resources of a system you oppose?
  ~ No. Hypocrisy is when you say something is wrong for others to do, but you
    do it yourself. I've never said that it's morally wrong to participate in
    the present system. My position is that it's a tragic collective mistake
    that we need to work our way out of. I do think it's *tactically* wrong to
    participate in it more than you have to, but different people have
    different tactical opportunities. I understand that many people are more
    stuck in it than I am, and I'm using my relative freedom to try to help
    them.

    Anyway, what's wrong with using the resources of something you oppose? If
    you were in a prison camp, wouldn't you look for ways to avoid forced
    labor but still eat? As I said in the essay: it's not about being pure or
    avoiding guilt — it's about adapting and becoming more free.

Isn't it a contradiction to preach independence while accepting help from others?
  ~ Certainly not. We have been confused by the many meanings of the word
    “dependence”. I think it's good to be dependent on *equals*, on friends
    and family with whom you have a healthy relationship, and it's good for
    them to be dependent on you. The kind of dependence that I'm against, that
    I would like to wipe off the Earth forever, is where someone has you over
    a barrel, where you have to do what they say because if you don't, they
    will withhold something that you need. The essence of “dropping out” is to
    cut dependencies on a system of power-*over*, and replace them with
    dependencies on a system of power-*with*.

But you use the internet!
  ~ Again, the reason to avoid connections to the system is to maintain
    autonomy. So I'll use any by-product or resource I can, as long as there
    few or no strings attached. I'll especially use a resource like the
    internet, a powerful tool to find allies and to transform human
    consciousness. As William Kötke said, not only is it acceptable to use the
    resources of the present system to build the next one, ideally *all* its
    resources would be used that way.

Dropping out is elitist because not everyone can do it.
  ~ But everyone *can* do it, just not right away. I figure it's going to take
    thousands of years, if humans don't go extinct first, before all of us can
    live in societies that are sustainable and non-coercive. In the mean time,
    we all have to do the best we can, and take any opportunity to get a
    little more free. The key is, when you get more freedom and autonomy, you
    have an ethical obligation to help others instead of exploiting them.

Isn't living with somebody without paying them anything called “mooching”?
  ~ Yes, it is called that, because we live in a slave culture with a slave
    language! Before the 20th century, it was normal for extended families to
    live in the same house, with most of them supporting the household in ways
    other than paying rent — if rent was paid at all. The very idea that you
    have to pay to occupy space is radical, and it serves to concentrate
    power: if I already have power (represented as “property”), those with
    less power/property have to give me more. We have it backwards! It is the
    alleged “owner” who is mooching, benefiting from the legal right to deny
    someone their natural right to occupy space in this world, to build a
    shelter and gather food and live in a cooperative community. (Not that
    rent-chargers are bad people. Many of them have been forced into a
    situation where they have to charge rent so they can make payments to
    still more powerful people.)

What if everybody dropped out? Who would you scavenge off of?
  ~ In practice, the problem is not too many people looking for different ways
    to live, but not enough. The dumpsters are still full of good stuff that
    is not scavenged but wasted in landfills. Too many people still buy
    pre-made junk food instead of making their own healthful meals, or drive
    cars instead of riding bicycles. This world is full of people with the
    skills and knowledge to build paradise, but they can't even begin, because
    they would lose their jobs shuffling data in the command structure, or
    manufacturing attention-wasting gadgets, or laboring to provide excess to
    the elite. As these roles are dropped, life will get easier, not harder.

Health care is not a manufactured need but a necessity.
  ~ Good health care is a necessity, but the industrial medicine that we've
    been trained to call “health care” does more harm than good at enormous
    expense. A good book on the subject is *Medical Nemesis* by Ivan Illich.
    Another good book is *The Health Of Nations* by Leonard Sagan, which
    presents evidence that modern improvements in health and life expectancy
    have not been caused by “advanced” medicine or even by better sanitation,
    but by social and psychological factors.

What if you get hit by a car? I hope the doctors and nurses haven't dropped out.
  ~ I hope they have! I'm already excluded from the American medical system,
    because it's so expensive that only rich people can afford it. If I got
    hit by a car, I might try to hide from the ambulance and crawl home to
    splint my broken bones with sticks and rags, rather than go a hundred
    thousand dollars in debt and be effectively a slave for the rest of my
    life.

    But if more doctors and nurses “dropped out”, if they carried their
    interest in healing outside the money economy, then they would have room
    to be more helpful than they are now. The less money they needed, the more
    they would be free to treat people without asking for money. It's true
    that expensive industrial medicine is ideal if you get hit by a car, but
    other forms of medicine are adequate for acute injuries, and much better
    for chronic sickness… and if everybody tried to live the way I'm living,
    in a few decades there wouldn't even be cars!

## October 2008 Update

“How To Drop Out” has been my most popular piece of writing for more than four
years. In that time I've bought some land, which you can read about on my
landblog[^5], and I've shifted my main residence to Spokane, where it's harder
to find good food in dumpsters, so my expenses are higher. Also, I've decided
I need to be even more aggressive in dispelling the very powerful myths that
are tied to the idea of dropping out of society. So here's a new short version
of the essay, hitting the main points, adding a few new points, and really
hammering the points that people keep missing. The original essay is below it.

1\. Do not drop out.
  ~ Instead, try to stop yourself from committing suicide until you can find a
    job that is so non-hellish that it does not make you suicidal, and then
    stay at that job, or an even better one if you can find it, for several
    decades. Grab what fun you can on the weekends, save up money, enjoy your
    retirement, and you will have lived a pretty good life.

    Seriously, it's good to live differently, to take uncommon paths, to
    minimize your dependence on a society gone astray. But if I were to say,
    “Woo-hoo! Dropping out is so cool! Quit your job now and hop a freight
    train to Bolivia, and you will be ALIVE while everyone else is DEAD,” then
    that might be worse than saying nothing. Motivational writing is a drug.
    If you require a motivational writer or speaker to live differently, then
    as soon as that external energy shot wears off, you will fizzle and burn
    out. But if everyone is trying to discourage you from doing something, and
    you do it anyway, *then* you have the internal motivation to persist and
    succeed. So: dropping out is not fun — better not do it.

2\. “Drop out” is a bad metaphor
  ~ …because it implies you are either in or out. In reality, *no one has ever
    been in or out* — everyone is somewhere in between. The most pathetic
    office drone still has forbidden dreams, and the most extreme mountain man
    still has commerce with society. Your mission is to find a niche,
    somewhere in this range, where you're not held over a barrel by a system
    that gives you no participation in power.

3\. It's not about being pure.
  ~ It's not about keeping your hands clean or avoiding guilt. Imagine birds
    living in a forest. Humans come and cut the forest down and build barns
    and plant crops. If some birds are able to live in the barns, or eat the
    crops, they don't say, “I'm not going to live in the barn — that's
    cheating,” or “I'm not going to eat the crops, because then I'm just part
    of the system.” Of all the species on Earth, only humans are that stupid.

    Now, that doesn't mean you should accept all gifts. Sometimes the “crops”
    are poisoned or the “barns” are traps. By all means, when you are offered
    benefits, use your full intelligence to see what strings are attached. And
    if you reject something, reject it because you see that it will do you
    more harm than good, not because you have some silly obsession with
    purity. Here's a test: when Thoreau was living at Walden Pond, he would
    often go into town for dinners with his family. If you see anything wrong
    with that, read this section again, or read this piece about the myth of
    self-sufficiency[^6].

4\. “Out” is relative and not absolute.
  ~ It is a path and not a destination. And you walk the path not by
    disconnecting from the rest of the world, but by engaging it in an
    intelligent and creative way, instead of in one of the disempowering ways
    that are made to look like the only ways. The myth of the pure and total
    outsider is one of those disempowering ways. It's a trick designed to make
    you set an impossible goal, get discouraged, and give up.

5\. Do not try to find a job doing what you love.
  ~ This is my most radical advice. There are some people in the world who
    have jobs they love so much that they would do them for free. If you
    become one of these people, you will probably get there not through
    planning but through luck, by doing what you love for free until somehow
    the money starts coming in. But if you make an effort to combine your
    income and your love, you are likely to end up compromising both, making a
    poverty income by doing something you don't quite love, or no longer love.
    For example, if you decide to become a chef because you love cooking, it
    will probably make you hate cooking, because cooking will become linked in
    your mind to all the bullshit around the job.

    What I recommend instead is to separate your money from your love. Get the
    most low-stress source of income that you can find, and then do exactly
    what you love for free. It might eventually make you money or it might
    not. “Do what you love and the money will follow” is mostly false. The
    real rule is: “If you're doing what you love, you won't care if you never
    make any money from it — but you still need money.”

6\. When you begin to get free, you will get depressed.
  ~ It works like this: When you were three years old, if your parents weren't
    too bad, you knew how to play spontaneously. Then you had to go to school,
    where everything you did was required. The worst thing is that even the
    fun activities, like singing songs and playing games, were commanded under
    threat of punishment. So even play got tied up in your mind with a control
    structure, and severed from the life inside you. If you were “rebellious”,
    you preserved the life inside you by connecting it to forbidden
    activities, which are usually forbidden for good reasons, and when your
    rebellion ended in suffering and failure, you figured the life inside you
    was not to be trusted. If you were “obedient”, you simply crushed the life
    inside you almost to death.

    Freedom means you're not punished for saying no. The most fundamental
    freedom is the freedom to do nothing. But when you get this freedom, after
    many years of activities that were forced, nothing is all you want to do.
    You might start projects that seem like the kind of thing you're supposed
    to love doing, music or writing or art, and not finish because nobody is
    forcing you to finish and it's not really what you want to do. It could
    take months, if you're lucky, or more likely years, before you can build
    up the life inside you to an intensity where it can drive projects that
    you actually enjoy and finish, and then it will take more time before you
    build up enough skill that other people recognize your actions as
    valuable.

7\. Hard work is satanic.
  ~ Our nature is to be lazy — primitive humans have moments of extreme
    exertion, but they don't go through life in a hurry, they don't push
    themselves, and despite the popular myth, they don't live in great stress
    on the edge of starvation. Even medieval serfs worked fewer hours, and at
    a slower pace, than modern industrialized workers. Ivan Illich has written
    that at the dawn of the industrial age, they would put a man in a pit that
    gradually filled with water, and give him a pump, and he would have to
    pump constantly all day to not drown. Humans are so naturally resistant to
    hard work that it took something like that to train people for industrial
    jobs. Now they do it with the schooling system, and with the religious
    doctrine that hard work is morally virtuous.

    The opposite of hard work is quality work. Quality work may be done
    quickly, but it is never pushed. It arranges itself around the goal of
    doing something as well as it can be done, and it finds its own pace.

    Another opposite of hard work is playful work. Like quality work it may be
    done quickly but is never pushed. But playful work is indifferent to
    quality, or even to success. When you're doing playful work, you don't
    care if it ends in total failure, because you're having such a good time
    that you would look forward to doing the whole job again.

8\. There are no easy rules.
  ~ This is a tangential point. If you're interested in dropping out of
    society, you are also likely to reject society's rules, and try to replace
    them with counterculture rules or rules of your own invention. Humans are
    map-making animals, and we're always trying to make a map so good that we
    no longer have to look at the land. This is a mistake, and if you reject
    the dominant map, it's best to learn to not use any map at all. There is
    one rule that's very simple, but not easy: observe reality and adjust.

9\. Don't rush it.
  ~ Getting free is not like walking through a magic doorway — it's like
    growing a fruit tree.

## March 2012 Update

When I wrote the original essay, my lifestyle happened to be close to the
popular myth of dropping out, which was unfortunate, because that myth is
unrealistic and distracting. I still get emails from people who are excited to
ask how I live in a cabin in the woods, or live with no money, things I never
claimed to do. I live in a house in the city, I hope to stabilize my expenses
around $10,000 a year, and like many famous “dropouts”, I've had help from
family and friends. William Burroughs received $200/month from his parents for
25 years after college (around $700,000 in 2012 dollars). Helen Nearing lived
on inherited money. Thoreau worked for his family and lived free on property
owned by Emerson. Jack Kerouac wrote part of *On The Road* while living with
his parents. Dick Proenneke had supplies flown in by friends. My point is not
that these people were “cheating”, but that *more* people should offer and
accept this kind of support, because it's difficult to get free without it.

I don't like to hear that people are out there imitating me instead of finding
their own path, but if you're curious about how I live now, I've written a
Frugal Early Retirement FAQ[^7].

[^1]: [http://www.mala.bc.ca/\~johnstoi/kafka/beforethelaw.htm](http://www.mala.bc.ca/~johnstoi/kafka/beforethelaw.htm)

[^2]: See the Communities Directory:
    [http://directory.ic.org/](http://directory.ic.org/).

[^3]: [http://books.google.com/books?id=apSdeG68IykC&pg=PP1\#PPA43,M1](http://books.google.com/books?id=apSdeG68IykC&pg=PP1#PPA43,M1)

[^4]: [http://media.steamboatpilot.com/drudge/food.html](http://media.steamboatpilot.com/drudge/food.html)

[^5]: [http://ranprieur.com/land.html](http://ranprieur.com/land.html)

[^6]: [http://incharacter.org/archives/self-reliance/old-mac-donald-had-a-farmers-market-total-self-sufficiency-is-a-noble-misguided-ideal/](http://incharacter.org/archives/self-reliance/old-mac-donald-had-a-farmers-market-total-self-sufficiency-is-a-noble-misguided-ideal/)

[^7]: [http://ranprieur.com/essays/retireFAQ.html](http://ranprieur.com/essays/retureFAQ.html)
