% Beyond Civilized and Primitive
% Ran Prieur
% 2008

Western industrial society tells a story about itself that goes like this: “A
long time ago, our ancestors were ‘primitive’. They lived in caves, were
stupid, hit each other with clubs, and had short, stressful lives in which
they were constantly on the verge of starving or being eaten by saber-toothed
cats. Then we invented ‘civilization’, in which we started growing food, being
nice to each other, getting smarter, inventing marvelous technologies, and
everywhere replacing chaos with order. It’s getting better all the time and
will continue forever.”

Western industrial society is now in decline, and in declining societies it’s
normal for people to feel that their whole existence is empty and meaningless,
that the system is rotten to its roots and should all be torn up and thrown
out. It’s also normal for people to frame this rejection in whatever terms
their society has given them. So we reason: “This world is hell, this world is
civilization, so civilization is hell, so maybe primitive life was heaven.
Maybe the whole story is upside-down!”

We examine the dominant story and find that although it contains some truth,
it depends on assumptions and distortions and omissions, and it was not
designed to reveal truth, but to influence the values and behaviors of the
people who heard it. Seeking balance, we create a perfect mirror image:

“A long time ago, our ancestors were ‘primitive’. They were just as smart as
we would be if we didn’t watch television, and they lived in cozy hand-made
shelters, were generally peaceful and egalitarian, and had long healthy lives
in which food was plentiful because they kept their populations well below the
carrying capacity of their landbase. Then someone invented ‘civilization’, in
which we monopolized the land and grew our population by eating grain. Grain
is high in calories but low in other nutrients, so we got sick, and we also
began starving when the population outgrew the landbase, so the farmers
conquered land from neighboring foragers and enslaved them to cut down more
forests and grow more grain, and to build sterile monuments while the elite
developed technologies of repression and disconnection and gluttonous
consumption, and everywhere life was replaced with control. It’s been getting
worse and worse, and soon we will abandon it and live the way we did before.”

Again, this story contains truth, but it depends on assumptions and
distortions and omissions, and it is designed to influence the values and
behaviors of the people who hear it. Certainly it’s extremely compelling. As a
guiding ideology, as a utopian vision, primitivism can destroy Marxism or
libertarianism because it digs deeper and overthrows their foundations. It
defeats the old religions on evidence. And best of all, it presents a utopia
that is not in the realm of imagination or metaphysics, but has actually
happened. We can look at archaeology and anthropology and history and say:
“Here’s a forager-hunter society where people were strong and long-lived.
Here’s a tribe where the ‘work’ is so enjoyable that they don’t even have the
concept of ‘freeloading’. Here are European explorers writing that certain
tribes showed no trace of violence or meanness.”

But this strength is also a weakness, because reality cuts both ways. As soon
as you say, “We should live like these actual people,” every competing
ideologue will jump up with examples of those people living dreadfully:
“Here’s a tribe with murderous warfare, and one with ritual abuse, and one
with chronic disease from malnutrition, and one where people are just mean and
unhappy, and here are a bunch of species extinctions right when primitive
humans appeared.”

Most primitivists accept this evidence, and have worked out several ways to
deal with it. One move is to postulate something that has not been observed
yet, but that if it were observed, would make the facts fit your theory.
Specifically, they say “The nasty tribes must have all been corrupted by
exposure to civilization.” Another move is to defend absolutely everything on
the grounds of cultural relativism: “Who are we to say it’s wrong to hit
another person in the head with an axe?” Another move is to say, “Okay, some
of that stuff is bad, but if you add up all the bad and good, primitive life
is still preferable to civilization.”

This is hardly inspiring, and it still has to be constantly defended, and not
from a strong position, because we know very little about prehistoric life. We
know what tools people used, and what they ate, but we don’t know how many
tribes were peaceful or warlike, how many were permissive or repressive, how
many were egalitarian or authoritarian, and we have no idea what was going on
in their heads. One of the assumptions I mentioned above, made by both
primitivism and the dominant story, is that stone age people were the same as
tribal forager-hungers observed in historical times. After all, we call them
both “primitive”. But in terms of culture, and even consciousness, they might
be profoundly different.

A more reasonable move is to abandon primitive life as an ideal, or a goal,
and instead just set it up as a perspective: “Hey, if I stand here, I can see
that my own world, which I thought was normal, is totally insane!” Or we can
set it up as a source of learning: “Look at this one thing these people did,
so let’s see if we can do it too.” Then it doesn’t matter how many flaws they
had. And once we give up the framework that shows a right way and a wrong way,
and a clear line between them, we can use perspectives and ideas from people
formerly on the “wrong” side: “Ancient Greeks went barefoot everywhere and
treated their slaves with more humanity than Wal-Mart treats its workers.
Medieval serfs worked fewer hours than modern Americans, and thought it was
degrading to work for wages. Slum-dwellers in Mumbai spend less time and
effort getting around on foot than Americans spend getting around in cars. The
online file sharing community is building a gift economy.”

Identifying with stone age people is like taking a big stretch. Then if we
relax, we find that a lot of smaller stretches are effortless, that we can
easily take all kinds of perspectives outside the assumptions of our little
bubble. We could even re-invent “primitivism” to ignore stone age people and
include only recent tribes who we have good information about, and who still
stack up pretty well against our own society. We could call this *historical
primitivism*, and a few primitivists have taken this position. The reason most
don’t is, first, our lack of knowledge about prehistory forms a convenient
blank screen on which anyone can project visions to back up their ideology.
And second, stone age primitivism comes with an extremely powerful idea, which
I call the *timeline argument*.

The timeline argument convinces us that a better way of life is the human
default, that all the things we hate are like scratches in the sand that will
be washed away when the tide comes in. Often it’s phrased as “99% of human
history has been that, and only 1% has been this.” Sometimes it’s illustrated
with a basketball court metaphor: It’s 94 feet long, and if you call each foot
ten thousand years, then we had fire and stone tools for 93 feet, agriculture
for one foot, and industrial society for around a quarter of an inch.

The key word in this argument is “we”. Where do you draw the line between “us”
and “not us”? Why not go back a billion years, and say that “we” were cell
colonies in the primordial oceans? Call a billion years a football field, and
the age of agriculture can dance on the head of a pin! This would seem to be a
much stronger argument, and yet I’ve never seen a primitivist draw the line
even as far back as *Homo habilis* two million years ago — or as recently as
*Homo sapiens sapiens* 130,000 years ago. Why not?

This is a difficult and important question, and it took me days to puzzle it
out. I think we’ve been confusing two separate issues. One is a fact, that the
present way we live is a deviation from the way of other biological life. If
this is our point, then a million year timeline is much too short — we should
go back at least a thousand times farther!

The other issue is a question: *Who are we?* When you get below the level of
culture, down to the level of biology or spirit, what is normal for us to do?
What is possible? What is right?

If you’re talking about who we are, then the million year timeline is much too
long. The mistake happens like this: “We are human, and we can plausibly call
*Homo erectus* human. Therefore our nature is to live like *Homo erectus*, and
the way we live now is not our tendency, not our normal behavior, but some
kind of bizarre accident. What a relief! We can just bring down civilization,
and we’ll naturally go back to living like *Homo erectus*, but since we don’t
know exactly how they lived, we’ll assume it’s like the very best recent
forager-hunter tribes.”

Now, I’m not disputing that many societies have lived close to the Earth with
a quality of life that we can’t imagine. Richard Sorenson mentions several,
and explores one in depth, in his essay on Preconquest Consciousness.[^1] What
I’m disputing is: 1) that we have any evidence that prehistoric people had
that consciousness; 2) that that consciousness is our default state; 3) that
it is simple for us to get back there; and 4) that large-scale technologically
complex societies are a deviation from who we are.

Who we are is changing all the time, and new genetic research has revealed
shockingly fast change in just the last few thousand years, including malaria
resistance, adult milk digestion, and blue eyes. According to anthropologist
John Hawks, “We are more different genetically from people living 5000 years
ago than they were from Neanderthals.”[^2]

Now, you could argue that some of these changes are not really who we are,
because they were caused by civilization: without domesticating cows and
goats, we would not have evolved milk digestion. By the same logic, without
inventing clothing, we would not have evolved hairless bodies. Without
crawling onto dry land, we would not have evolved legs.

My point is, there is no place you can stick a pin and say “this is our
nature”, because our nature is not a location — it is a journey. We crawled
onto dry land; we became warm-blooded and grew hair; we moved from the forests
to the plains; we walked upright; we tamed fire and began cooking food; we
invented language; our brains got bigger; our tools got more complex; we
invented grain agriculture and empires and airplanes and ice cream and nuclear
weapons.

Primitivists want to say that all the steps up to the last few are who we are,
and the last few are not who we are. But it’s a difficult argument because we
really did those things! So they say that the last few things, although we did
them, were extremely *unlikely*. The word they usually use is “fluke”. We
would have lived in balance until the sun burned out, except that some wild
grain seeds happened to fall in the mud at the edge of one camp during a food
shortage, and someone noticed that they sprouted into new plants, and had a
clever idea.

If civilization began with a fluke, we would expect to see it begin only once,
and spread from there. But instead we see grain farming and explosions of
human social complexity in several places at about the same time: along the
Tigris and Euphrates, and also in Africa, India, and China. You could still
argue that those changes spread by travel, that there was one accident and
then some far-flung colonies — unless we found an early civilization so remote
that travel was out of the question.

That civilization has been found. Archaeologists call it the Norte Chico, in
present-day Peru. From 3000--1800 BC, they built at least 25 cities, and they
had giant stone monuments earlier than anyone except the Mesopotamians. Even
more shocking, their system was not based on grain! All previous models of
civilization have put grain agriculture at the very root: once you had grain
farming, you had a denser, more settled population, which led to a more
complex society, and also you had a storable commodity that enabled hierarchy.

The Norte Chicans ate only small amounts of grain, but they did have a
storable commodity that enabled hierarchy, something that allowed small
differences in wealth to feed back into large differences, and ultimately
entrenched elites commanding slaves to build monolithic architcture. It was
cotton! So we have people on opposite sides of the world, in different
geographies, using different materials, falling into the same pattern, but
that pattern is not about food. It seems to be about economics, or more
precisely, about human cognition. After thousands of generations of slow
change, human intelligence reached a tipping point that permitted large
complex societies to appear in radically different circumstances.

Now it’s tempting to call “civilization” the new human default, but of course,
in many places, these societies did not appear. Also, they all collapsed! And
then new ones appeared, and those collapsed. I don’t think it even makes sense
to talk about a human default, any more than it makes sense to talk about a
default state for the weather. But the range in which we move has widened.

My information on the Norte Chico comes from Charles C. Mann’s book *1491*, a
survey of recent findings about the Americas before the European conquest.
Mann is neither a primitivist nor an advocate for western civilization, but an
advocate for, well, *far* western civilization, which was a lot more like
western civilization than we thought. At its peak, the Inca empire was the
largest in the world, with exploited colonies, massive forced resettling of
workers, and bloody power struggles among the elite just like in Europe and
Asia. The Maya deforested the Yucatan and depleted its topsoil only a few
centuries after the Romans did the same thing around the Mediterranean. Aztec
“human sacrifice” was surprisingly similar to English “public execution” that
was happening at exactly the same time. Even North America had a city,
Cahokia, that in 1250 was roughly the size of London. In 1523, Giovanni da
Verrazzano recorded that the whole Atlantic coast from the Carolinas up was
“densely populated”. In the 1540’s, De Soto passed through what is now eastern
Arkansas and found it “thickly set with great towns”. Of course, that
population density is possible only with intensive agriculture. Mann writes,
“A traveler in 1669 reported that six square miles of maize typically
encircled Haudenosaunee villages.”

By the time the conquest really got going, all these societies had been wiped
out by smallpox and other diseases introduced by the first Europeans.
Explorers and conquerors found small tribes of forager-hunters in an untamed
wilderness, and assumed it had been that way forever. In a blow to both
primitivism and “progress”, it turns out that most of these people were not
living in the timeless ways of their ancestors — the “Indians” of American
myth were *post-crash societies*!

The incredible biological abundance of North America was also a post-crash
phenomenon. We’ve heard about the flocks of passenger pigeons darkening the
sky for days, the tens of millions of bison trampling the great plains, the
rivers so thick with spawning salmon that you could barely row a boat, the
seashores teeming with life, the deep forests on which a squirrel could go
from the Atlantic to the Mississippi without touching the ground. We don’t
know what North America would have looked like with no humans at all, but we
do know it didn’t look like that under the Indians. Bone excavations show that
passenger pigeons were not even common in the 1400’s. Indians specifically
targeted pregnant deer, and wild turkeys before they laid eggs, to eliminate
competition for maize and tree nuts. They routinely burned forests to keep
them convenient for human use. And they kept salmon and shellfish populations
down by eating them, and thereby suppressed populations of other creatures
that ate them. When human populations crashed, nonhuman populations exploded.

This fact drives a wedge between two value systems that are supposed to be
synonymous: love of nature and love of primitive humans. We seem to have only
two options. One is to say that native North Americans went too far — of
course they weren’t nearly as bad as Europeans, but we need to return to even
lower levels of population and domestication. I respect this position morally,
but strategically it’s absurd. How can the future inhabitants of North America
be held to a way of life that the original inhabitants abandoned at least a
thousand years ago?

The other option is to say that native North Americans did not go too far. The
subtext is usually something like this: “Moralistic ecologists think it’s
wrong that my society holds nature down and milks it for its own benefit, but
if the *Native Americans* did it, it must be okay!” This conclusion is nearly
universal in popular writing. Plenty of respectable authors would never be
caught idealizing simple foragers, but when they find out these “primitives”
hunted competitors like neolithic Microsofts and cleared forests to plant
grain, out comes the “wise Indian” card.

There is a third option, but it requires abandoning the whole
civilized-primitive framework. Suppose we say, “We can regrow the spectacular
fecundity that North America had in the 1700’s, not as a temporary stage
between the fall of one Earth-monopolizing society and the rise of another,
but as a permanent condition — and we will protect this condition not by
duplicating any way our ancestors lived, but by inventing new ways. We can do
this because human nature continues to evolve. Just as the old model of
civilization became available to us as we changed, we are changing again and
new doors are opening.”

Well, they’re only open a crack. To grow biological abundance for its own
sake, and not for human utility, is still a fringe position. But my point is
that the civilized-primitive framework forces us to divide things a certain
way: On one side are complexity, change, invention, unstable “growth”, taking,
control, and the future. On the other side are simplicity, stasis, tradition,
stability, giving, freedom, and the past. Once we abandon that framework,
which is itself an artifact of western industrial society, we can integrate
evidence that the framework excludes, and we can try to match things up
differently.

The combination that I’m suggesting is: complexity, change, invention,
stability, giving, freedom, and both the past and the future. This isn’t the
only combination that could be suggested, and I doubt it’s the easiest to put
into practice, but it’s surprisingly noncontroversial. Al Gore would probably
agree with every point. The catch is that Gore is playing to a public
consciousness in which “freedom” means a nice paint job on control, and in
which no one has any idea what’s really necessary for stability.

Americans think freedom means *no restraint*. So I’m free to start a big
company and rule ten thousand wage laborers, and if they don’t like it they’re
free to go on strike, and I’m free to hire thugs to crack their heads, and
they’re free to quit, and I’m free to buy politicans to cut off support for
the unemployed, so now they’re free to either starve and die, or accept the
job on my terms and use their freedom of speech to impotently complain.

A better definition of freedom is *no coercion*. I define “restraint” as
preventing someone from doing something, and “coercion” as forcing someone to
do something, usually by punishing them for *not* doing it. Primitive
societies tend to be very good at avoiding coercion. In *The Continuum
Concept*, Jean Liedloff writes that among the Yequana, it is forbidden to even
*ask* another person to do something. It seems strange to us, but to have a
society where no one is forced to do what they don’t want to do, you actually
need a lot of restraints.

So there’s one place where we can learn more from looking backward than
looking forward. But there is more than one way for coercion to appear — it’s
like a disease with multiple vectors. Primitive cultures have extraordinary
resistance to the way coercion must have appeared over and over in their
history — among a group of people who all know each other, an arrogant
charismatic leader arises. But they have little or no resistance to another
way it’s been appearing more and more often over the last few thousand years:
as a hidden partner with seductive new physical and social tools.

To understand what’s necessary for both freedom and stability, we need to go
deep into a close ally of the critique of civilization: the critique of
technology. Now, as soon as you say you’re against technology, some nit-picker
points out that even a stone axe is a technology. We know what we mean, but we
have trouble putting it into words. Our first instinct is to try to draw a
line, and say that technologies on one side are bad, and on the other side are
good. And at this point, primitivism comes into the picture as a convenience.

It reminds me of the debate over abortion, which is ultimately about drawing a
line between when the potential child is part of the mother’s body, and when
it’s a separate person with full rights. Drawing the line at the first breath
would make the most sense on biblical grounds, but no one wants to do that,
and almost no one wants to draw it at passage through the birth canal. But if
you go farther back than that, you get an unbroken grey area all the way to
conception! Fundamentalists love to draw the line at conception, not only
because it gives them more control over women, but because they hate grey
areas.

In the same way, primitivism enters the debate over good technology with a
sharply drawn line a long way back. We don’t have to wrestle with how to
manufacture bicycles without exploitation, or how to make cities sustainable,
or what uses are appropriate for water wheels, or how to avoid the atrocities
of ancient empires, if we just draw the line between settled grain farmers and
nomadic forager-hunters.

To be fair to primitivists, they still have to wrestle with the grey areas
from foraging to horticulture to agriculture, and from camps to villages to
towns, and with arguments that we should go back even farther. The real
fundamentalists on this issue are the techno-utopians. They say “technology is
neutral,” which really means “Thou shalt not ascribe built-in negative effects
to any technology,” but of course they ascribe built-in positive effects to
technologies all the time. So it ends up being not a statement of fact but a
command to action: “Any technology you can think of, do it!” This is like
solving the abortion debate by legalizing murder.

We must apply intelligent selection to technology, but we aren’t really
worried that the neighboring village will reinvent metalworking and massacre
our children with swords. We just want bulldozers to stop turning grassy
fields into dreadful suburbs, and we want urban spaces to be made for people
not cars, and we want to turn off the TV, and take down the surveillance
cameras, and do meaningful work instead of sitting in windowless office
dungeons rearranging abstractions to pay off loans incurred getting our
spirits broken.

We like hot baths and sailing ships and recorded music and the internet, but
we worry that we can’t have them without exterminating half the species on
Earth, or exploiting Asian sweatshop workers, or dumping so many toxins that
we all get cancer, or overextending our system so far that it crashes and we
get eaten by roving gangs.

But notice: primitive people don’t think this way! Of course, if you put them
on an assembly line or on the side of a freeway or in a modern war, they would
know they were in hell. But if you offered them an LED lantern made on an
assembly line, or a truck ride to their hunting ground, or a gun, most of them
would accept it without hesitation. Primitive people tend to adopt any tool
they find useful — not because they’re wise, but because they’re ignorant,
because their cultures have not evolved defenses against tools that will lead
them astray.

I think the root of civilization, and a major source of human evil, is simply
that we became clever enough to extend our power beyond our empathy. It’s like
the famous Twilight Zone episode where there’s a box with a button, and if you
push it, you get a million dollars and someone you don’t know dies. We have
countless “boxes” that do basically the same thing. Some of them are physical,
like cruise missiles or ocean-killing fertilizers, or even junk food where
your mouth gets a million dollars and your heart dies. Others are social, like
subsidies that make junk food affordable, or the corporation, which by
definition does any harm it can get away with that will bring profit to the
shareholders. I’m guessing it all started when our mental and physical tools
combined to enable positive feedback in personal wealth. Anyway, as soon as
you have something that does more harm than good, but that appears to the
decision makers to do more good than harm, the decision makers will decide to
do more and more of it, and before long you have a whole society built around
obvious benefits that do hidden harm.

The kicker is, once we gain from extending our power beyond our seeing and
feeling, we have an incentive to repress our seeing and feeling. If child
slaves are making your clothing, and you want to keep getting clothing, you
either have to not know about them, or know about them and feel good about it.
You have to make yourself ignorant or evil.

But gradually we’re learning. Every time it comes out that some product is
made with sweatshop labor, a few people stop buying it. Every day, someone is
in a supermarket deciding whether to spend extra money to buy shade-grown
coffee or fair trade chocolate. It’s not making a big difference, but all mass
changes have to start with a few people, and my point is that we are
stretching the human conscience farther than it’s ever gone, making sacrifices
to help forests we will never see and people we will never meet. This is not
simple-minded or “idealistic”, but rational, highly sophisticated moral
behavior. And you find it not at the trailing edge of civilization but at the
leading edge, among educated urbanites.

There are also growing movements to reduce energy consumption, to eat
locally-produced food, to give up high-paying jobs for better quality of life,
and to trade industrial-scale for human-scale tools. I would prefer not to own
a car, but my motivation is not to save the world — it’s that the continuing
costs of owning a car put me in a different economic niche, where I am more
connected to the impersonal world of money, and less connected to friends and
family. On my land I don’t use power tools, except for a chainsaw when I have
a huge amount of wood to cut. In general I’d rather do work in a way that
excercises my body, allows me to hear birds, and does not make me dependent on
an industrial system that gives me no participation in power.

When I look at the discourse around this kind of choice, it’s positively
satanic. People whose position is basically “Thundersaw cut fast, me feel like
god” present themselves as agents of enlightenment and progress, while people
with intelligent reasons for doing something completely new — choosing weaker,
slower tools when high-energy tools are available — are seen as lizard-brained
throwbacks. What’s even more tragic is when they see themselves that way.

This movement is often called “voluntary simplicity”, but we should
distinguish between *technological* simplicity and *mental* simplicity.
Primitive people, even when they have complex cultures, use simple tools for a
simple reason — those are the only tools they have. In so-called
“civilization”, we’ve just been using more and more complex technologies for
simple-minded reasons — they give us brute power and shallow pleasures. But as
we learn to be more sophisticated in our thinking about technology, we will be
able to use complex tools for complex reasons — or simple tools for complex
reasons.

Primitivists, understandably, are impatient. They want us to go back to using
simple tools and they don’t care why we do it. It’s like our whole species is
an addict, and seductive advanced technologies are the drug, and primitivism
is the urge to throw our whole supply of drugs in the garbage. Any experienced
addict will tell you that doesn’t work. The next day you dig it out of the
garbage or the next week you buy more.

Of course there are arguments that this will be impossible. The most common
one goes like this: “For civilization, you need agriculture, and for
agriculture, you need topsoil. But the topsoil is gone! Agriculture survives
only by dumping synthetic fertilizers on dead soil, and those fertilizers
depend on oil, and the easily extracted oil is also gone. If the industrial
system crashes just a little, we’ll have no oil, no fertilizer, no
agriculture, and therefore no choice but foraging and hunting.”

Agriculture, whether or not it’s a good idea, is in no danger. The movement to
switch the whole planet to synthetic fertilizers on dead soil (ironically
called “the Green Revolution”) had not even started yet when another movement
started to switch back: organic farming. Present organic farmers are still
using oil to run tractors and haul supplies in, but in terms of getting the
soil to produce a crop, organic farming *is* agriculture without oil, and it’s
the fastest growing segment of the food economy. It is being held back by
cultural intertia, by the political power of industrial agribusiness, and by
cheap oil. It is not being held back by any lack of land suitable for
conversion to organic methods. No one says, “We bought this old farm, but
since the soil is dead, we’re just going to leave it as a wasteland, and go
hunt elk.” People find a way to bring the soil back.

The other common argument is that “humanity has learned its lesson.” I think
this is on the right track, but too optimistic about how much we’ve learned,
and about what kind of learning is necessary. Mere rebellion is as old as the
first slave revolt in Ur, and you can find intellectual critiques of
civilization in the Old Testament: From Ecclesiastes 5:11, *“When goods
increase, they are increased that eat them: and what good is there to the
owners thereof?”* And from Isaiah 5:8, *“Woe unto those who join house to
house, and field to field, until there is no place.”* If this level of
learning were enough, we would have found utopia thousands of years ago.
Instead, people whose understanding was roughly the same as ours, and whose
courage was greater, kept making the same mistakes.

In *Against His-story, Against Leviathan*, Fredy Perlman set out to document
the whole history of resistance to civilization, and inadvertently undermined
his conclusion, that this Leviathan will be the last, by showing again and
again that resistance movements become the new dominators. The ancient Persian
empire started when Cyrus was inspired by Zoroastrianism to sweep away the
machinery of previous empires. The Roman empire started as a people’s movement
to eradicate the Etruscans. The modern nation-state began with the Moravians
forming a defensive alliance against the Franks, who fell into warlike habits
themselves after centuries of resisting the Romans. And we all know what
happened with Christianity.

I fear it’s going to happen again. Now, the simple desire to go primitive is
harmless and beneficial — I wish luck and success to anyone who tries it, and
I hope we always have some tribal forager-hunters around, just to keep the
human potential stretched. And I enjoy occasional minor disasters like
blackouts and snowstorms, which serve to strip away illusions and remind
people that they’re alive. I loved the idea in *Fight Club* (the movie) of
destroying the bank records to equalize wealth. That’s right in line with the
ancient Jubilee tradition, where debts were canceled every few decades to
restabilize the economy and prevent a hard collapse.[^3]

What I fear is that some writers are trying to inspire a movement to actively
cause a hard collapse, and if they attract enough followers, they could
succeed. This would be a terrible mistake — not just a moral mistake but a
*strategic* mistake — and the root of it is old-fashioned authoritarian
thinking: that if you force someone to do something, it’s the same as if they
do it on their own. In fact it’s exactly the opposite. The more we are forced
to abandon this system, the less we will learn, and the more aggressively we
will fight to rebuild something like it. And the more we choose to abandon it,
the more we will learn, and the less likely we will make the same mistakes.

The really frightening thing is when people fantasize about destroying
libraries and museums, as if this would prevent a complex society from ever
getting started again — just like thousands of years ago, without libraries or
museums, people didn’t start complex societies about fifty times. In the
addiction metaphor, burning libraries is like not only throwing the drugs
away, but also erasing all memory of being an addict, and then going back to
the same tempting environment with the same addictive personality. It’s such a
perfect mistake that I can only conclude that these people subconsciously want
to repeat the whole cycle of pain.

Of course we will not have another society based on oil, and per-capita energy
consumption will drop, but it’s unlikely that energy or complexity will fall
to preindustrial levels. Hydroelectric and atomic fission plants are in no
immediate danger, and every year there are new innovations in energy from sun,
wind, waves, and ethanol crops. Alternative energy would be growing much
faster with good funding, and in any case it’s not necessary to convert the
whole global infrastructure in the next twenty years. Even in a general
collapse, if just one region has a surplus of sustainable energy, they can use
it to colonize and re-“develop” the collapsed areas at their own pace.
Probably this will be happening all over.

I don’t think there’s any escape from complex high-energy societies, so
instead of focusing on avoiding them, we should focus on making them
tolerable. This means, first, that our system is enjoyable for its
participants — that the activities necessary to keep it going are experienced
by the people who do them as meaningful and freely chosen. Second, our system
must be ethical toward the world around it. My standards here are high — the
totality of biological life on Earth must be better off with us than without
us. And third, our system must not be inherently unstable. It might be
destroyed by an asteroid or an ice age, but it must not destabilize itself
internally, by having an economy that has to grow or die, or by depleting
nonrenewable resources, or by having any trend at all that ratchets, that
easily goes one way but can’t go the other way without a catastrophe.

These three standards seem to be separate. When Orwell wrote that the future
is “a boot stamping on a human face — forever”, he was imagining a system
that’s internally stable but not enjoyable. Techno-utopians fantasize about a
system that expands into space and lasts billions of years while crushing any
trace of biological wildness. And some paranoids fear “ecofascism”, a system
that is stable and serves nature, but that represses most humans.

I think all these visions are impossible, for a reason that is overlooked in
our machine-worshipping culture: that collapse often happens for psychological
reasons. Erich Fromm said it best, in “What Does It Mean to Be Human?”

Even if the social order can do everything to man — starve him, torture him,
imprison him, or over feed him — this cannot be done without certain
consequences which follow from the very conditions of human existence. Man, if
utterly deprived of all stimuli and pleasure, will be incapable of performing
work, certainly any skilled work. If he is not that utterly destitute, he will
tend to rebel if you make him a slave; he will tend to be violent if life is
too boring; he will tend to lose all creativity if you make him into a
machine. Man in this respect is not different from animals or from inanimate
matter. You can get certain animals into the zoo, but they will not reproduce,
and others will become violent although they are not violent in freedom… If
man were infinitely malleable, there would have been no revolutions.

In *1491*, Mann writes that on Pizarro’s march to conquer the Incas, he was
actively helped by local populations who were sick of the empire’s oppression.
Fredy Perlman’s book goes through the whole history of western civilization
arguing for the human dissatisfaction factor in every failed society. And it’s
clear to me and many other Americans that our empire is falling because nobody
believes in it — not the troops in Iraq, who quickly learn that the war is
bullshit, not the corporate executives, who at best are focused on short term
profits and at worst are just thieves, not the politicians, who are cynically
violating every supposed American principle for lobbyist money, and not the
people who actually do the work, most of whom are just going through the
motions.

Also, America (with other nations close behind) is getting more and more
tightly controlled, and thus more unbearable for its participants. This is a
general problem of top-down systems: for both technical and psychological
reasons, it’s easy to add control mechanisms and hard to remove them, easy to
squeeze tighter and hard to let go. As the controllers get more selfish and
insulated, and the controlled get more frustrated and depressed, and more
energy is wasted on forcing people to do what they wouldn’t do without force,
the whole system seizes up, and can only be renewed by a surge of transforming
energy from below. This transformation could be peaceful, but often the ruling
interests block it until it builds up such pressure that it explodes
violently.

The same way the ruling interests become corrupt through an exploitative
relationship with the people, we all become corrupt when we participate in a
society that exploits the life around it. When we talk about “nature”, we
don’t mean wheat fields or zoo animals — we mean plants that scatter seeds to
the wind and animals that roam at will. We mean freedom, raw aliveness, and we
can’t repress it outside ourselves without also repressing it inside
ourselves. The spirit that guides our shoe when it crushes grass coming
through cracks in the driveway, also guides us to crush feelings and
perceptions coming through cracks in our paved minds, and we need these
feelings and perceptions to make good decisions, to be sane.

If primitive life seems better to us, it’s because it’s easier for smaller and
simpler societies to avoid falling into domination. In the best tribes, the
“chief” just tells people to do what they want to do anyway, and a good chief
will channel this energy into a harmonious whole. But the bigger a system
gets, and the longer a big system lasts, the more challenging it is to
maintain a bottom-up energy structure.

I have a wild speculation about the origin of complex societies. The Great
Pyramid of Giza is superior in every way to the two pyramids next to it — yet
the Great Pyramid was the *first* of the three to be built. It’s like Egyptian
civilization appeared out of nowhere at full strength, and immediately began
declining. My speculation is: the first pyramid was not built by slaves! It
was built by an explosion of human enthusiasm channeled into a massive
cooperative effort. But then, as we’ve seen in pretty much every large system
in history, this pattern of human action hardened, leaders became rulers,
inspired actions became chores, and workers became slaves.

To achieve stability, and freedom, and ecological responsibility, we must
learn to halt the slide from life into control, to maintain the bottom-up
energy structure permanently, even in large complex systems. I don’t know how
we’re going to do this. It’s even hard for individuals to do it — look at all
the creative people who make one masterpiece and spend the rest of their life
making crappy derivative works. The best plan I can think of is to build our
system out of cells of less than 150 people,[^4] roughly the number at which
cooperation tends to give way to hierarchy, and even then to expect cells to
go bad, and have built-in pathways for dead cells to be broken down and new
ones to form and individuals to move from cell to cell. Basically, we’d be
making a big system that’s like a living body, where all past big systems have
been animated corpses.

Assuming that our descendants do achieve stability, what technological level
will they be at? I want to leave this one wide open. It’s possible in theory
for us to go even farther “back” than the stone age. I call this the *Land
Dolphins* scenario — that we evolve into super-intelligent creatures who don’t
use any physical tools at all. At the other extreme, I’m not ruling out space
colonies, although the worst mistake we could make would be expanding into
space before we have learned stability on our home planet. I think physical
travel to other solar systems is out of the question — long before mechanistic
science gets that far, we will have moved to new paradigms that offer much
easier ways to get to new worlds.

The “singularity” theory is also off the mark. Techies think machines will
surpass humans, because the mechanistic model tells them that we’re nothing
but machines ourselves, so all we need to do is make better machines, which
according to the myth of “progress” is inevitable. I think if we do get a
technological transcendence, it’s going to involve machines *changing* humans.
My favorite scenario is time-contracted virtual reality: suppose you can go
into an artificial world, have the experience of spending a week there, and
come back and only a day has passed, or an hour, or a minute. If we can do
that, all bets are off!

The biggest weakness in my vision is that innovation can go with stability,
that we can continue exploring and trying new things without repeatedly
destabilizing ourselves by extending our power beyond our understanding. But
it’s equally implausible that we could somehow transform ourselves out of
being a curious and inventive species, or that we could drive ourselves to
extinction — we are by far the most mentally adaptable species on Earth, and
not bad at physical adaptation.

One possibility is that we will diverge into multiple species. It happens all
the time in nature, and for most of the history of hominids there were several
kinds of us walking around. This could happen through biotech, or through
ordinary evolution, which we still don’t understand. Scientists have spent
decades bombarding fruit flies with radiation, trying to produce a random
mutation that would lead to a new species, and totally failed. But in another
experiment, fruit flies were put through a maze with different exits depending
on environmental preferences, and they formed distinct populations that
refused to interbreed. It’s a good guess that this is already happening with
humans, and that our accelerating evolution is being driven not by our high
population, but by increasing diversity of human environments, which is likely
to continue. Maybe we will spin off subspecies that overspecialize themselves
into extinction, while a few generalist core species survive.

If I had to guess, we’re just going to keep making mistakes and falling down
forever, and in that case the best we can do is minimize the severity of the
falls. I think we’re doing a pretty good job even in the present collapse,
which is shaping up to be a big one. Innovations in efficient farming and
water filtration and small-scale alternative energy are going to give many
regions a soft landing. Even in America, which has a long way to fall, we
might escape with no more than a severe depression, a mild fall in population,
and a much-needed shakeout of technology and economics. Life will get more
painful but also more meaningful, as billions of human-hours shift from
processing paperwork and watching TV to intensive learning of new skills to
keep ourselves alive. These skills will run the whole range, from tracking
deer to growing tomatoes to fixing bicycles to building solar-powered wi-fi
networks — to new things we won’t even imagine until we have our backs to the
wall.

I think we can see the future in popular fiction, but not the fiction we
think. Most science fiction is either stuck in the recent past, in the
industrial age’s boundless optimism about machines, or it looks at the present
by exploring the unintended consequences of high tech. Cyberpunk is better —
if you put a 1950’s Disney version of the year 2000 through a cyberpunk
filter, you would get very close to the real 2000. The key insight of
cyberpunk is that more technology doesn’t make things cleaner — it makes
things dirtier.

Fantasy, while seeming to look at the past, might be seeing the future: elves
and wizards could represent the increasing diversity of humans (or
post-humans) after the breakdown of the industrial monoculture, and “magic” is
clearly a glimpse of post-mechanistic scientific paradigms. And I think
steampunk does the best of all, if you factor out the Victorian frippery. Like
cyberpunk, it shows a human-made world that’s as messy and alive as nature,
but the technological system is a crazy hybrid of everything from “stone age”
to “space age” — thus refuting the very idea that we are locked into ages.

Primitive people see time as a circle. Civilized people see it as a line. We
are about to see it as an open plain where we can wander at will. History is
broken. Go!

[^1]: [http://www.danbartlett.co.uk/writings/sorenson.php](http://www.danbartlett.co.uk/writings/sorenson.php)

[^2]: [http://www.smh.com.au/news/science/evolution-getting-faster-by-the-millennium/2007/12/11/1197135461835.html](http://www.smh.com.au/news/science/evolution-getting-faster-by-the-millennium/2007/12/11/1197135461835.html)

[^3]: [http://www.yesmagazine.org/article.asp?ID=532](http://www.yesmagazine.org/article.asp?ID=532)

[^4]: [http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dunbar%27s\_number](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dunbar%27s_number)
