% Dialectics and Systems Theory
% Richard Levins
% 1998

## Abstract

Systems Theory is best understood in its dual nature as an episode in the
generic development of human understanding of the world, and as a specific
product of its social history. On the one hand it is at a “moment” in the
investigation of complex systems, the place between the formulation of a
problem and the interpretation of its solution where mathematical modeling can
make the obscure obvious. On the other hand it is the attempt of a
reductionist scientific tradition to come to terms with complexity,
non-linearity and change through sophisticated mathematical and computational
techniques, a groping toward a more dialectical understanding that is held
back both by its philosophical biases and by the institutional and economic
contexts of its development.

## Introduction

In a generally sympathetic review of *The Dialectical Biologist* (Maynard
Smith, 1986), and in personal conversations, John Maynard Smith argued that
the development of a rigorous quantitative mathematical systems theory makes
dialectics obsolete. Engels' awkward “interchange of cause and effect” can be
replaced by “feedback”, the mysterious “transformation of quantity into
quality” is now the familiar phase transition of threshold effect, while “even
in my most convinced Marxist phase, I could never make much sense of the
negation of the negation or the interpenetration of opposites.” He could have
added that hierarchy theory grasps some of the insights of “integrated levels”
or “overdetermination.”

On the other hand, Mary Boger, a leader of the New York Marxist School, has
been urging me for years not to allow dialectics to be subsumed under systems
theory. Despite systems theory's concern with complexity, interconnection and
process she has argued that it is still fundamentally reductionist and static,
and despite the power of its mathematical apparatus it does not deal at all
with the richness of dialectical contingency, contradiction or historicity.
Finally, she added that systems-theoretic “interconnection” does not grasp the
subtleties of dialectical “mediation.”

This essay is a first attempt to systematize my own views as they have evolved
in discussions with Mary Boger, Rosario Morales, Richard Lewontin and other
comrades.

As I entered this exploration I became aware of two opposing temptations. On
the one hand I wanted to emphasize the distinctness of dialectics from
contemporary systems theory, to proclaim that our theoretical foundations are
not obsolete and continue to have something important to say to the world of
science that systems theory has not already adopted. On the other hand, along
with Engels I found it gratifying to see science, grudgingly and haltingly and
inconsistently but nevertheless inexorably, becoming more dialectical. Both
affirmations are true, but their emotional appeal can also lead to errors of
one-sidedness. I attempted to use this awareness to question my conclusions as
I made one or another claim.

Any description of systems theory and of dialectical materialism is subject to
two kinds of problems: in both areas there are many practitioners with quite
divergent views. I will not attempt any kind of comprehensive survey of
systems theory or “a systems approach,” but limit myself to systems theory in
the narrow sense as a mathematical approach to “systems” of many parts. And
second, systems theory and dialectics are not mutually exclusive. Some systems
theorists are also Marxists or have been inﬂuenced by Marxism in their
research contributions to the development of the theory. Other Marxists have
had at least a passing contact with systems theory and have used some of its
notions in their Marxist research. For example, Goran Therborn, a Swedish
Marxist social scientist inﬂuenced by systems theory, approached the nature of
the state from two perspectives: the traditional Marxist view of the role of
the state as an expression of class rule, and the systems theoretic
examination of its dynamics as a system with inputs and outputs. The
publisher's blurb for his book *What Does the Ruling Class Do When it Rules?*
(Therborn, 1978) summarizes the work: “Therborn uses the formal categories of
systems analysis - input mechanisms, processes of transformation, output ﬂows
g to advance a substantive Marxist analysis of state power and state
apparatuses…”

Nonetheless, the two are quite different in their origins, objectives and
theoretical underpinnings. In what follows I will discuss several general
themes that unite and differentiate them: wholeness and interconnection,
selection of variables or parts, purposefulness, and the outcomes of
processes. Materialist dialectics[^1] is not offered as a complete philosophy
of nature, a System in the classical sense. Dialecticians are too aware of the
historical contingency of our thinking to expect that there will ever be a
ﬁnal world view. Rather it is first of all polemical, a critique of the
prevailing failings of both the mechanistic reductionist approach and its
opposite, the holistic idealist focus. Together these have dominated
Euro-North American natural and social science since its emergence in 17th
century Britain as a partner in the bourgeois revolution. They have also
dominated politics as the broad liberal-conservative consensus that has deﬁned
the “mainstream” politics of democratic capitalism.

Therefore dialectical materialism has focused mostly on some selected aspects
of reality while ignoring others. At times we have emphasized the materiality
of life against vitalism, as when Engels said that life was the mode of motion
of “albuminous bodies” (*i.e.*, proteins; now we might say macromolecules).
This seems to be in contradiction with our rejection of molecular
reductionism, but simply reﬂects different moments in an ongoing debate where
the main adversaries were first the vitalist emphasis on the discontinuity
between the inorganic and the living realms, and then the reductionist erasure
of the real leaps of levels. At times we have supported Darwin in emphasizing
the continuity of human evolution with the rest of animal life, at other times
the uniqueness of socially driven human evolution. We could classify our
species as omnivores, along with bears, to emphasize that we are just another
animal species that has to get its energy and substance by eating other living
things, and are not limited to only one kind of food. Or we could underline
our special status as “productivores” who do not merely find our food and our
habitat but produce them. Both are true; the relation of continuity and
discontinuity in process is an aspect of dialectics that systems theory does
not deal with at all.

But critique is not just criticism, and dialectics goes beyond the rejection
of reductionist or idealist thinking to offer a coherent alternative, more for
the way in which it poses questions than for the speciﬁc answers its advocates
have proposed at any particular time. Its focus is on wholeness and
interpenetration, the structure of process more than of things, integrated
levels, historicity and contradiction. All of this is applied to the objects
of the study, to the development of thought about those objects, and
self-reﬂexively to the dialecticians ourselves so as not to lose sight of the
contingency and historicity of our own grappling with the problems we study.

Dialectical materialism is unique among the critiques of science in that its
roots are outside the academy in political struggle as well as within, that it
directs criticism both at reductionism and idealism, that it is consciously
self-reﬂexive, and that it rejects the goal of a ﬁnal “system.” But it is
unlike postmodernist criticism of science which uses the contingency of
scientiﬁc claims to deny the historically bounded but no less real validity of
some claims over others, in favor of an acritical pluralism.

Systems theory has a dual origin, in engineering and in the philosophical
criticism of reductionism. On the one hand it comes out of engineering as
cybernetics, the study of self-regulating mechanisms with often rather complex
circuitry. Norbert Weiner introduced the term cybernetics in his book of that
name (*Cybernetics, or Control in the Animal and Machine*, 1961). The term
became part of common usage in the Soviet Union, but was mostly replaced in
the USA by control theory, the theory of servomechanisms or systems theory. In
this form it is the mathematics of feedback, the study of mathematical models.
The preface to *The Theory of Seruomechanisms* (James, *et al.*,1947), one of
the early classical texts in this ﬁeld, states:

> “The work on servomechanisms in the [Livermore] Radiation Laboratory grew
> out of its need for automatic radar systems. It was therefore necessary to
> develop the theory of servomechanisms in a new direction, and to consider
> the servomechanism as a device intended to deal with an input of known
> statistical character in the presence ofinterference of known statistical
> character. (ix.)
>
> A servomechanism involves the control of power by some means or other
> involving a comparison of the output of the controlled power and the
> actuating device. The comparison is sometimes referred to as feedback.” (2.)

This form of systems theory is highly mathematical and formal. Its earlier
versions assumed systems that were given, the equations known, and measurement
precise. But soon systems analysis was taken up by military designers, with
the idea of a weapons system replacing the development of particular weapons
as the theoretical problem, and by management systems as the scientific
aspects of directing large enterprises. Here the measurements are fuzzier, the
equations not known, and therefore other techniques become necessary. Herbert
Simon at Carnegie Mellon University, Mesarovic at Case Western Reserve, the
International Institute for Applied Systems Analysis in Austria as well as
mathematicians and engineers in the Soviet Union and other centers worked to
advance the conceptual frameworks and mathematics of many variables
interacting at once and the computing routines for following what happens.
More recently, the Santa Fe Institute has made the study of complexity itself
the core intellectual problem.

The major role of engineering and management systems in developing systems
theory is reflected in the assumption of goal- seeking. Thus Meadows, *et al.*
(1992) deﬁne a system as “an interconnected set of elements that is coherently
organized around some purpose. A system is more than the sum of its parts. It
can exhibit dynamic, adaptive, goal-seeking, self-preserving and evolutionary
behavior.”

But the “system” of systems theory is not reality itself but a model of
reality, an intellectual construct that grasps some aspects of the reality we
want to study but also differs from that reality in being more manageable and
easier to study and alter. Therefore models are not “true” or “false.” They
are designed to meet a number of criteria that are in part contradictory, such
as realism, generality and precision (Levins, 1966). It is the hope of systems
analysts that the departures from reality that make them easier to study do
not lead to false conclusions about that reality.

The wholeness, interconnectedness of parts and the purposefulness of systems
are emphasized. The first two qualities are inherent in what we mean by a
system.

## Wholes

The other source of “systems” theory has been in critical attempts to counter
the prevailing reductionism in science since the last century. Here its
boundaries are not well deﬁned but shade off gradually into various holisms.

Holism is not new. The history of science is not the history of its
mainstream, the succession of dominant paradigms popularized by Thomas Kuhn.
There has always been dissidence in science, dissatisfaction with the dominant
ideas, alternative approaches within the various disciplines, and quite
divergent “mainstreams” among disciplines. “Holistic” criticism has always
coexisted with the dominant reductionism. It was expressed in such currents as
vitalism in developmental biology, Bergson's “emergence,” in psychology
(Bronfenbrenner, Perl, Piaget), ecology (Vernadsky's biosphere, the Soviet
“geo-biocoenosis,” Clements' and later Odum's ecosystems), anthropology
(Kroeber's “superorganic”) and other ﬁelds as a grasping for wholeness and
interconnection. In this aspect it is usually referred to in the United States
as a “systems approach” or “systems thinking.” Some authors engage in systems
theory in both the narrow and the broad meanings. Especially ambitious and
central was L. von Bertalanffy's General Systems Theory starting in the 19305
(von Bertalanffy, 1950). Biological complexity was usually a central
challenge. W. Ross Ashby's *Design for a Brain* poses the problem as one of
reconciling mechanistic structure and seemingly purposeful behavior:

> We take as basic the assumptions that the organism is mechanistic in nature,
> that it is composed of parts, that the behavior of the whole is the outcome
> of the compounded actions of the parts, that organisms change their behavior
> by learning, and that they change it so that the later behavior is better
> adapted to their environment than the earlier. Our problem is, first, *to
> identify the nature of the change which shows as learning*, and secondly *to
> ﬁnd why such changes should tend to cause better adaptation for the whole
> organism*. (Emphasis in original.)

Ecology also has brought to public consciousness the rich interconnectedness
of the world. Examples are regularly put forth of the unexpected, often
counterproductive effects of interventions directed at solving a particular
problem. Pesticides increase pest problems, draining a wetland can increase
pollution, antibiotics provoke antibiotic resistance, clearing forests to
increase food production may lead to hunger. And Barry Commoner's dicta that
everything is connected to everything else and that everything goes somewhere
have become part of the common sense of at least a part of the public.

The powerful impact of the realization that things are connected sometimes
leads to claims that “you cannot separate” body from mind, economics from
culture, the physical from the biological or the biological from the social.
Much very creative research has gone into showing the connectedness of
phenomena that are usually treated as separate. It is even said that because
of their interconnectedness they are all “One,” an important element of
mystical sensibility that asserts our “Oneness” with the Universe.

Of course you *can* separate the intellectual constructs “body” from “mind,”
“physical" from “biological,” “biological” from “social.” We do it all the
time, as soon as we label them. We have to in order to recognize and
investigate them. That analytical step is a necessary moment in understanding
the world. But it is not sufﬁcient. After separating, we have to join them
again, show their interpenetration, their mutual determination, their entwined
evolution and yet also their distinctness. They are not “One.” The pairs of
mutualist species or predator and prey are certainly linked in their
population dynamics. Sometimes the linkage is loose, as when each affects the
life of the other but the effect is not necessary. Sometimes very tightly, as
in the symbiosis of algae and fungi in lichens. Snowy owls and Arctic hares
drive each other's population cycles in a defining feedback loop. Mutualists
may evolve to become “one,” as Lynn Margulis has pioneered in arguing for the
origins of cellular structures. But predator and prey are not “One” until the
last stages of digestion. Psychotherapists work both with asserting connection
in examining family systems and with criticizing “codependence,” the
pathological loss of boundaries and autonomy. There is a one-sidedness in the
holism that stresses the connectedness of the world but ignores the relative
autonomy of parts.

As against the atomistic and absolutized separations of reductionism, holists
counterpose the unity of the world. That is, they align themselves at the
“oneness” end of a spectrum from isolated to “One.” They look for some
organizing principle behind the wholeness, some “harmony” or “balance” or
purpose which gives the wholes their unity and persistence. In technological
systems, there is a goal designed by the engineers that is the criterion for
evaluating the behavior of the system and for modifying the design. To the
extent that the development of systems theory has been dominated by designed
systems, goal-seeking behavior appears as an obvious property of systems as
such, and therefore it is sought also in the study of natural systems.

In the study of society, this may lead to a functionalism which assumes a
common interest drixnng the society. But a society is not a servomechanism;
its component classes pursue different, both shared and conﬂicting goals.
Therefore it is not a “goal-oriented” system, even when many of its components
are separately goal-seeking.

Within the framework of static holism it is difﬁcult to accommodate change as
other than destructive, so that conservation biology often emphasizes
preservation of a particular species or ecological formation, rather than
conditions that permit continued evolution.

Dialecticians value the holistic critique of reductionism. But we reject the
sharp dichotomy of separation/connection or autonomy/wholeness and an absolute
subordination of one to the other. This is not a complaint about being
“extreme.” “Extreme” is a favorite reproach by liberals, for whom the desired
condition is moderation, a middle ground “somewhere in between,” mainstream,
compromise. Their favorite colors are “not black or white but shades of gray.”
In contrast the dialectical criticism is “onesidedness,” the seizing upon one
side of a dichotomous pair or a contradiction as if it were the whole thing.
Our spectrum is not a gradient from black through all the grays to white, but
a fractal rainbow.

Of course, despite Hegel's dictum that “the truth is the whole” we cannot
study The Whole. The practical value of Hegel's affirmation is twofold:

First, that problems are larger than we have imagined so that we should extend
the boundaries of a question beyond its original limits. Even systems theory
construes problems too small, either because the domain is assigned to the
analyst as a given “system” or because additional variables known to interact
with the initial system are not measureable or do not have known equations, or
because of traditional boundaries of disciplines. Thus a systems analysis of
the regulation of blood sugar may include the interactions among sugar itself,
insulin, adrenalin, cortisol and other molecules but is unlikely to include
anxiety, or the conditions that produce the anxiety such as the intensity of
labor and the rate of using up of sugar reserves, whether or not the job
allows a tired worker to rest or take a snack. Models of heart disease are
likely to include cholesterol and the fats that are turned into cholesterol
but not the social classes of the people in whom the cholesterol is formed and
breaks down. Systems analysis would not know how to deal with the pancreas
under capitalism or the adrenals in a racist workplace. Models of epidemics
may include rates of reproduction of viruses and their transmission but not
the social creation of a sense of agency that may allow people to take charge
of their exposure and treatment.

The second application of the understanding that the truth is the whole is
that after we have deﬁned a system in the broadest terms we can at the time,
there is always something more out there that might intrude to change our
conclusions.

Dialectics appreciates the pre-reductionist kind of holism, but not its static
quality, its hierarchical structure with a place for everything and everything
in its place, nor the a prion" imposition of a purposefulness that may or may
not be there. Thus it “negates” materialist reductionism's negation of the
earlier holism, an example of the negation of the negation that Maynard Smith
found so opaque but could have recognized as the non-linearity of change.

## What Are Parts?

Wholes are thought of as made out of parts. Systems theory likes to take as
its elements unitary variables that are the “atoms” of the system, prior to
it, and qualitatively unchanging as they ebb and flow. Their relations are
then “interactions” as a result of which the variables increase or decrease,
emit “outputs” and thus produce the properties of the wholes. But the wholes
are not allowed to transform the parts, except quantitatively. The long
distance conversation does not transform the telephone, the market does not
change the buyer or seller, and power does not affect the powerful nor love
the lover. It is the priority of the elements and along with it the separation
of the structure of a system from its behavior - rational assumptions for
designed and manufactured systems - that keeps systems theory still vulnerable
to the reproach of being large-scale reductionism.

The parts of dialectical wholes are not chosen to be as independent as
possible of the wholes but rather as points where properties of the whole are
concentrated. Their relation is not mere “interconnection” or “interaction”
but a deeper interpenetration that transforms them so that the “same” variable
may have a very different signiﬁcance in different contexts and the behavior
of the system can alter its structure. For instance temperature is important
in the lives of most species. But temperature has many different meanings. It
acts on the rate of development of organisms and therefore their generation
time and also on the size of individuals; it limits the suitable locations for
nesting or reproduction; it may determine the boundaries of foraging or the
time available for searching for food. It inﬂuences the available array of
potential food species and the synchrony between the appearance of parasites
and their hosts. It modiﬁes the outcomes of species encounters.

But temperature is not simply given to the organisms. The organisms change the
temperature around them: there is a layer of warmer air at the surfaces of
mammals; the shade of trees makes forests cooler than the surrounding
grassland; the construction of tunnels in the soil regulates the temperatures
at which ground nesting ants raise their brood; the color ofleaf litter and
humus determines the reﬂection and absorption of solar radiation. Through the
physiology and demography of the organism, *effective* temperature, its range
and its predictability are quite different from the weather box temperature of
a place. On another time scale, temperature acts through various pathways as
pressures of natural selection, changing the species, which again changes its
effective temperature. Thus “temperature” as a biological variable within an
ecosystem is quite different from the more easily measured physical
temperature that can be seen in the weather box as prior to the organisms.

Although systems theory is comfortable with the idea that a cer-tain equation
is valid only within some limits, it does not deal explicitly with the
interpenetrations of variables in its models, their transformations of each
other. In a sense, Marx's *Capital* was the first attempt to treat a whole
system rather than merely to criticize the failings of reductionism. His
initial objects of investigation in Volume I, commodities, are not autonomous
building blocks or atoms of economic life that are then inserted into
capitalism, but rather are studied as “cells” of capitalism chosen for study
precisely because they reveal the workings of the whole. They can be separated
out for inspection only as aspects of the whole that called them forth. To
Marx, this was an advantage because the whole is reﬂected in the workings of
all the parts. But for large-scale reductionists the relationship goes from
given, ﬁxed parts to the wholes that are their product. The priority and
autonomy of the part is essential to systems analysis. “Autonomy” does not of
course mean they have no inﬂuence on each other. The “variables” of a system
may increase and decrease but remain what they are.

Parts of a system may themselves be systems with their own structure and
dynamics. This approach is taken by hierarchy theory in which nested systems
each contribute as parts to higher level systems (O'Neill, *et al.*, 1986).
This allows us to separate domains for analysis. However, the reverse process,
the deﬁning and transforming of the subsystems by the higher level, is rarely
examined.

Much statistical analysis, for instance in epidemiology, separates the
independent variables which are determined outside the system from the
dependent variables which are determined by them. The independent variables
might be rainfall or family income; the dependent variable might be the
prevalence of malaria or the suicide rate. In contrast, systems approaches
recognize the feedbacks that give mutual determination: predators eat their
prey, prey feed their predators; prices increase production, production leads
to surpluses that lower prices; snow cools the earth by reﬂecting away more
sunlight, and then a cooler earth has more snow. In feedback loops, changes in
each variable are in a sense the causes of the changes in the others. What
then happens to causation? What makes one “cause” more fundamental than
another?

We can attempt to answer this question in two ways. First, we may ask where a
particular pattern of change was initiated at a particular time. For instance
we might ask of a predator/prey system, why does the abundance of both
predator and prey vary over a ﬁve hundred mile gradient? We can analyze the
feedback relationship to show that if the environmental differences along the
gradient enter the system by way of the prey, say through temperature
increases increasing its growth rate, this will increase the predator
population so that the two variables are positively correlated. But if the
environmental differences enter by way of the predator, perhaps because the
predator is itself hunted more in some places than others, then increases in
hunting reduce the predator and therefore increase the prey. This gives us a
negative correlation between them. Therefore if we observe a positive
correlation we can say that the variation is driven from the prey end and if a
negative correlation then the variation is driven from the predator end. The
prey mediates the action of the environment and is the “cause” of the observed
pattern in the one system, the predator in the other. Similarly in a study of
the capitalist world economy I examined production and prices during the 19605
and 70s and found that the major agricultural commodities exhibited a positive
correlation between production or yield per acre and prices on the world
market. This supports the view that price ﬂuctuations arise mostly in the
larger economy and affect production decisions rather than appear as responses
to ﬂuctuations in production, and this despite obvious and dramatic changes of
production due to the weather or pests.

Whether this is generally true or not is an empirical question. In a complex
network of variables the driving forces for change may originate anywhere.
When we attempt to ask “does economics or geopolitics detennine foreign
policy?” or “is the content of TV driven by sales or ideology?” the question
is unanswerable in general. The complex network of mutual determinations
requires a complex answer that is hinted at in the awkward term
“overdetermination” which recognizes causal processes as operating
simultaneously on different levels and through different pathways. Or it
brings us back to Hegel: the truth is the whole.

Then where is the locus of historical materialism? Doesn't it require that the
economy determine society?

No! “The economy” as a set of factors in social life has no inherent priority
over any of the other myriad interpenetrating processes. Sometimes it is
determinant of particular events, sometimes not. As long as we remain within
the domain of a systems network tracing pathways, everything inﬂuences
everything else by some pathway or other. Changes in the productive technology
change economic organization and class relations and beliefs about the world,
but changes in the technology arise through the implementation of ideas, and
exist in thought before they are made ﬂesh. Or as the founding document of
UNESCO stated, “Since wars are made in the minds of men….” Then is social life
a product of intellect? Or is intellect an expression of class and gender?
Approached in this way, all is mediations, and the assignment of absolute
priority is dogmatism.

But this is quite different from identifying *the mode of production and
reproduction*, which is present not as a “factor” in the network but as the
network itself. It is the structure of that network, that mode, that defines
workers and capitalists as the actors or “variables” in the network, makes it
possible for sexism to have commercial value, makes legislation a political
activity, or allows major events to be initiated by the caprices of monarchs.
It is the context within which the various mediations play themselves out and
transform each other rather than a factor among factors.

## Goal Seeking

The third quality of systems, purposefulness, also betrays the origin of
systems theory. The outcomes are evaluated for their correspondence to the
built-in purpose, while deviations from that purpose are seen as non-adaptive,
contradictory and self-destructive behaviors. These appear as system failures.
The engineer can discard or a manager can reorganize the structures that lead
to them. But in reality only some systems are purposeful even when they are
constructed to satisfy some purpose. In others, while the “elements” are
actors each with their own purposes and may be said to seek goals, the system
as a whole does not.

Dialectical “wholes” are not defined by some organizing principle such as
harmony or balance or maximization of efﬁciency. In my view, a system is
characterized by its structured set of contradictory processes that gives
meaning to its elements, maintains the temporary coherence of the whole and
also eventually transforms it into something else, dissolves it into another
system, or leads to its disintegration.

## Outcomes

Once mathematical systems theory defines a set of variables and interrelations
it then asks the simple mathematical question, what is the future trajectory
of those variables starting from such and such initial conditions? From then
on, all depends on the mathematical agility of the analyst or the computer
program to come up with “solutions” of the equations. A solution is the path
of the variables. The desired result is prediction, the correspondence between
the theoretical and observed values of the variables.

There are only a few possible outcomes of equations:

a.  The variables may increase or decrease out of bounds. This may mean a real
    explosion, disrupting the system. But it can also mean that past a certain
    point the equations are not valid.

b.  The variables may reach a stable equilibrium. It then remains there unless
    perturbed, and returns toward equilibrium after a perturbation. If the
    processes include randomness, then a solution may be a stable probability
    distribution.

c.  There may be more than one equilibrium, in which case not all of the
    equilibria are stable. Each stable equilibrium is the end result for the
    variables that start out “near” that equilibrium, within some range called
    its basin of attraction. The basins of attraction around the equilibria
    are separated by boundaries where there are unstable equilibria. The
    outcome then depends on the starting place, and the Variables move toward
    the equilibrium in whose basin of attraction they start out.

d.  The Variables may show or approach cyclic behavior, in which case how
    quickly the variables cycle and the magnitude of the fluctuations describe
    the solution. A cyclical pattern also has its basin of attraction, the
    range of initial conditions from which the variables approach that cycle.

e.  The trajectories may remain bounded but instead of approaching an
    equilibrium or a regular periodicity show seemingly erratic pathways,
    sometimes looking periodic for a while and then abruptly moving away, and
    different initial conditions no matter how similar may give quite
    different trajectories. This is referred to as chaos although in fact it
    has its own regularities.

The behavior of a system will depend on the equations themselves, the
parameters, and the initial conditions. Much of the content of systems theory
is the description of the relations between the assumptions of the model and
the outcomes for the variables, or identifying the procedures for validating
the models.

The outcomes are expressed as quantitative changes in the variables. This is
an extremely useful activity for making predictions or deciding upon
interventions in the system or system design. But it is also limiting, and
imposes constraints on the models. Most models require specifying the
equations and estimating the parameters and variables. Therefore those that
are not readily measureable are likely to be omitted. For instance, we can
write compartment models for epidemics that take as variables the numbers of
individuals in each compartment, those who are susceptible, infected but not
infective yet, infective, or recovered and immune. We make some plausible
assumptions about the disease (rates of contagion, duration of latent and
infective periods, rate of loss of immunity) and turn the crank, watching as
numbers shift from one compartment to another. Then we can ask questions such
as, will the disease persist, how long will it take to pass the peak, how many
people will die before it is over, what would be the effect of immunizing *x*%
of the children? We could add complications of differences due to age and even
subdivide the population into classes with different parameters.

Contagion also depends on people's behavior, the level of panic in the
population. This changes in the course of the epidemic as people observe
acquaintances getting sick and dying, and may take protective action. But how
much experience is needed to change behavior? How much panic before they will
lose their jobs rather than face infection? What degrees of freedom do people
have? How long will an altered behavior last? Do people really believe that
what they do will affect what happens to them? Will they remember for next
time? Since we have neither the equations for describing these aspects nor
measurements of panic or historical horizon or economic vulnerability, such
considerations will not usually appear in the models but at best only in the
footnotes. In recent years, modeling has become a recognized major research
activity. But this has had the effect of reducing modeling to the quantitative
models described above.

Most systems modelers take it for granted that quantitative information
(“hard” data) is preferable to qualitative (“soft”) information and prefer
prediction or ﬁtting of data to understanding. In their view of science,
progress goes simply from the vague, intuitive, qualitative to the precise,
rigorous and quantitative. The highest achievement is the algorithm, the rule
of procedure which can be applied automatically by anyone to a whole class of
situations, untouched by human minds. That is the rationale behind Maynard
Smith's suggestion that systems theory replaces dialectics. Marxists argue for
a more complex and non-hierarchical relation between quantitative and
qualitative approaches to the world.

A much smaller effort goes into qualitative systems modeling which would allow
us to deal with these “soft” questions. Instead of the goal of describing a
system fully in order to predict its future completely or to “optimize” its
behavior, we ask how much we can get away with not knowing and still
understand the system?

Whereas the engineering systems presume rather complete con trol over the
parameters so that we can talk about optimizing the parameters, the systems we
are most concerned with in nature and in society are not under our control. We
try to understand them in order to identify the directions in which to push
but do not trust our models to be more than useful insights into the structure
or process.

Dialecticians take as the objects of our interest the processes in complex
systems. Our primary concern is understanding them in order to know what to
do. We ask two fundamental questions about the systems: why are things the way
they are instead of a little bit different, and why are things the way they
are instead of very different, and from these the practical questions of how
to intervene in these complex processes to make things better for us. That is,
we seek practical and theoretical understanding rather than a good fit.
Precision and prediction may or may not be useful in this process, but they
are not the goals of it.

The Newtonian answer to the first question is, things remain the way they are
because nothing much is happening to them. Stasis is the normal state of
affairs, and change must be accounted for. Order is the desired state, and
disruption is treated as disaster. A dialectical view begins from the opposite
end: change is universal and much is happening to change everything. Therefore
equilibrium and stasis are special situations that have to be explained. All
“things” (objects or patterns of objects or processes) are constantly subject
to outside inﬂuences that would change them. They are also all heterogeneous
internally, and the internal dynamics is a continuing source of change. Yet
“things” do retain their identities long enough to be named and sometimes
persist for very long times indeed. Some of them, much too long.

The dynamic answer to the ﬁrst question is homeostasis, the self-regulation
that is observed in physiology, ecology, climatology, the economy and indeed
in all systems that show any persistence. Homeostasis takes place through the
actions of positive and negative feedback loops. If an initial impact sets
processes in motion that diminish that initial impact, we refer to it as
negative feedback, while if the processes magnify the original change the
feedback is positive. Thus positive and negative applied to feedback have
nothing to do with whether we like them or not. When positive feedbacks have
undesirable results that increase out of bounds, we refer to them as vicious
circles.

It is often said that negative feedback stabilizes and positive feedback
destabilizes a system. But this is not always the case. If positive feedback
exceeds the negative then the system is unstable in the technical sense that
it will move away from equilibrium. In that case, an increase of negative
feedback is stabilizing. But if the indirect negative feedbacks by way of long
loops of causation are too strong compared to the shorter negative feedbacks
the system is also unstable and will oscillate. Then positive feedback loops
can have a stabilizing effect by offsetting the excessive long negative
feedbacks. Long loops behave like delays in the system. The signiﬁcance of a
feedback loop depends on its context in the whole. The complex systems of
concern to us usually have both negative and positive feedbacks.

Homeostasis does not imply benevolence. A negative feedback loop should not be
seen as the elementary unit of analysis or of design. A simple equation may
give the appearance of “self regulation” in the sense that when a variable
gets too big it is reduced and when it gets too small it is increased. But the
reduction and the increase may have quite different causes. An increase in
wages may lead to employers cutting the labor force, increasing unemployment
and thus making it easier to reduce wages. A decrease in wages may lead to
labor militancy that restores some of the cuts. The outcome (if nothing else
happens) is a partial restoration of the original situation. Neither party is
seeking homeostasis, and the wage/ employment feedback is not designed or
pursued by anyone to maintain economic stability. It is simply one possible
manifestation of class struggle. Thus homeostasis does not imply
functionalism, a view which assigns purpose to the feedback loop as such.

This distinction is important, especially when we examine apparently
unsuccessful attempts to achieve socially recognized goals. Meadows, Meadows
and Randers (1992) present the problem as follows:

> This book is about overshoot. Human society has overshot its limits, for the
> same reason that other overshoots occur. Changes are too fast. Signals are
> late, incomplete, distorted, ignored or denied. Momentum is great. Responses
> are slow… (2.)

From this systems-theoretic point of view, the socialized earth's
error-correcting feedbacks are inadequate. And if you assume that social
processes are aimed at sustainable, healthful, equitable relations among
people and with the rest of nature, then the defect is in the feedback loops,
the mechanisms for achieving these goals. But if agriculture fails to
eliminate hunger, if resource use is not modulated to protect people's health
and long-term survival, it is not because of the failings of a mechanism aimed
at these goals. Rather, most of world agriculture is aimed at producing
marketable commodities, resources are used to make proﬁts, and the welfare
effects are side effects of the economy. It is the contradictions among
opposing forces (and between those of the ecology and the economy) rather than
the failure of a good try by inadequate information systems and deﬁcient
homeostatic loops that are responsible for much of the present suffering and
the threat of more.

When a change occurs in a component (or variable) of a system, that initial
change percolates through a network of interacting variables. It is ampliﬁed
along some pathways and buffered along others. In the end, some of the
variables (not necessarily the ones that received the initial change or those
nearest the point of impact) have been altered, while others remain pretty
much the way they were. Therefore we identify “sinks” in the system, variables
that absorb a large part of the impact of the external shock, and other
aspects of the system that remain unchanged, protected by the sinks. We can
even have situations where things change in ways that contradict our common
sense, where for example adding nitrogen to a pond can lower the nitrogen
level or an inﬂated military budget undermines national security. (This
outcome depends on the location of positive feedbacks within a system.)

But “unchanged” requires some further examination. The “variable” is not a
thing but some aspect of a thing, perhaps the numbers of individuals in a
population, not “the population.”

One simple system consists of a predator that feeds on a single prey. All else
is treated as “external.” It is sometimes the case that the predator is
regulated only by the prey. Then a change in conditions that acts on the
reproduction or development rate or mortality of the prey directly, that is
not due to the predator, will be passed along to the predator. Increased prey
leads to increased predators and this reduces the prey back toward its
original value. The “prey” variable may remain unchanged while the predator
population either increases in response to increased availability of prey or
diminishes if fewer prey are produced. The predator variable acts as a sink in
this system. Tracing the ups and downs of predator and prey ﬁnishes the tasks
of the systems analysis.

But what I referred to as “prey” is really only the numbers of prey. If prey
reproduction has increased with more food but the population of prey has not
changed, it is because the prey are being produced faster and consumed faster.
That is, the prey population is younger. Individuals may be smaller and
therefore more vulnerable to heat stress. They may be more mobile, migrating
to ﬁnd unoccupied sites. If the prey are mosquitoes, a shorter life span may
mean that they do not spread as much disease even if there are more of them.
They may spend more time in cool moist shelters where they meet additional
predators and the model has to be changed. Natural selection in a younger
population might focus more on those qualities that affect the survival and
early reproduction of the young. Thus the variable, “prey,” that was unchanged
in the model can be actively transformed in many directions not dealt with in
the model.

The particulars of the dynamics, the relations among the positive and negative
feedbacks in a system, sources and sinks, connectivity among variables, delays
along pathways and their effects are all in the domain of systems theory in
the narrow sense. The parts of the system become the variables of models, and
equations are proposed for their dynamics. Systems theory studies these
equations. Mathematical rules have been discovered for determining when the
system will approach some equilibrium condition or oscillate “permanently,”
that is, as long as the assumptions still hold.

Modern computational methods allow for the numerical solutions of large
numbers of simultaneous equations. The parameters are measured, the initial
conditions of the variables are estimated or assumed. (The distinction between
parameters and variables is that the parameters are assumed to be determined
outside the boundaries of the “system” and are only inputs while the variables
change each other within the “system.”) The computer then calculates
successive steps in the process and comes up with numbers, the predicted
states of the variables at different times. The numerical results are compared
to observations. If the correspondence is good enough, it is assumed that the
model is valid, that it “accounts for” the behavior of the system being
studied, or 90% of the behavior, or whatever level we decide is acceptable. If
not, more data may be collected to get better estimates of parameters or the
equations may be modiﬁed.

However, systems theory starts with the variables as givens. It deals with the
problems of selecting variables only in a very limited way. When we approach
any real system of any complexity, the question of what the right variables
are to include in the model is itself quite complex. It is the classical
Marxist problem of abstraction (see Ollman, 1993, for a detailed examination
of dialectical abstraction). Some practical systems modeling criteria are:
reciprocal interaction, commensurate time scales, measureability, variables
that belong to the same discipline and can be represented by equations of
change. The system should be large enough to include the major pathways of
interaction, with identification of where external inﬂuences enter the
network. Systems theory makes use of growing computing capacity to give
numerical solutions to the differential or difference equations that describe
the dynamics. In order to have precise outcomes it is necessary to have good
estimates of the parameters, things like the reproductive rate of a
population, the intensity of predation, the half-life of a molecule, or the
cost/ price ratio in an economic production function. The gathering of these
measurements is difficult, so that estimates are often taken from the
published literature rather than made afresh. Parameters that cannot be
measured readily cannot be used.

Once variables are selected, they are then treated as unitary “things,” whose
only property is quantity. The mathematics will tell us which quantities
increase, which decrease, which fluctuate or remain unchanging. The source of
change is either in the dynamics of the variables in interaction or in
perturbation from outside the system. (“Outside the system” means outside the
model. In a model of species interactions a genetic change within a species is
regarded as an external event, since it is external to the demographic
dynamics although it is located inside the cells of the bodies of individual
members of a population.) But all variables are themselves “systems” with
internal heterogeneity and structure, with an internal dynamics that is
influenced by events on the system scale and also changing the behavior of the
variables. Thus dialectics emphasizes the provisional nature of the system and
the transitory nature of the systems model.

The variables of a system change at different rates, so that some are
indicators of long-term history while others are more responsive to the most
recent conditions. Thus in nutritional surveys we use the height of children
for their age as an indicator of long-term nutritional status, the growth over
a lifetime, while weight for height indicates food intake over recent months
or weeks and therefore measures acute malnutrition. Because each variable
reﬂects its history on its own time scale, they are generally not in “balance”
or harmony. Ideology need not “correspond” to class position, political power
to economic power, or forests to climate. Rather, the links between variables
in a system identify processes: ideology responding, not corresponding, to
class position, economic power enhancing political power, political power
being used to consolidate economic power, colder climate trees such as spruce
and hemlock gradually displacing the oak and beech ofa warmer period. But all
of these processes take time, so that a system does not show a passive
correlation among its parts but a network of processes constantly transforming
each other. In Darwinian evolutionary theory both the adaptedness of a species
to its surroundings and its non-adaptedness are required, the former showing
the outcomes of natural selection and the latter identifying it as a process
that is never complete and showing the history of the species. Complete
adaptedness would have been an argument for special creation, not evolution,
proclaiming a harmony that manifests the benevolent wisdom of the Creator.

The second question, why things are the way they are instead of very
different, is a question of history, evolution, development. It is concerned
with the long-term processes that change the character of systems. The
variables involved in long-term change may overlap with the short-range ones,
but are not in general the same. Many of the short-term processes are
reversible, oscillating according to conditions without accumulating to
contribute to the long run.

At any one moment the short-term events are strong processes, temporarily
overwhelming some of the long-term directional changes that are imperceptible
in the short run. Yet the two scales are not independent. The reversible
short-term oscillations through which a system confronts changing
circumstances have themselves evolved and continue to evolve as a result of
their functioning in the long run. And they leave long-term residues: the
breathing in and breathing out of ordinary respiration may also result in the
accumulation of toxic or abrasive materials in the lung; the repetitive cycles
of agricultural production can exhaust the soil; the periodicity of the tides
also has its long-term effect of lengthening the day through tidal friction;
the buying and selling of commodities can result in the concentration of
capital. Long-term changes alter the circumstances to which the short-term
system responds as well as the means available for that response.

Here mathematical systems theory is less useful, since the mathematics is much
better developed for studying steady-state systems than evolving ones. (The
work of Ilya Prigogine on dissipative systems is only a partial exception to
this limitation.)

## Conclusion

Systems analysis is one of the techniques for policy making. As its technical
side becomes more sophisticated it also is usually less accessible to the
non-specialist. Therefore it often reinforces a technocratic approach to
public policy, and does that in the service of those who can afford to
contract its services. The ruling class and its representatives are referred
to in the trade by the more neutral term “decision makers.” This is of course
not unique to applied systems theory, but is a common correlate of its
increasing use within a managerial framework. A special effort has to be made
to counteract this tendency, to demystify the study of complexity and to
democratize even complex decision making. The Soviet author Afanasyev, before
he embraced the “free market,” wrote an interesting book, *The Scientiﬁc
Management of Society*, which emphasized the systems-theoretic aspects of
planning as a technocratic procedure with only perfunctory nods sin the
direction of popular control of the planning process as a whole.

Systems theory can be understood as a “moment” in the investigation of
scientific problems within complex systems by means of mathematical models.
Its value depends in large measure on the context of its use, and here
dialectics has a broader role that can inform that use:

1.  The posing of the problem, the domain to be explored, what is taken as the
    “fundamental elements” and what as the givens of the problem, the
    boundaries that are not questioned. To do this well requires not only a
    substantive knowledge of the objects of interest, their dynamics and
    history, and an understanding of process. There is also frank
    partisanship, since what is taken as given and what is assumed to be
    “fundamental” is a political as much as a technical problem. For instance
    a model of a society that consists of atomic individuals making decisions
    in the void can not escape the dead end of bourgeois individualist
    reductionism no matter how elegantly the mathematics is developed. An
    economic model that consists of prices and production and profits and such
    can give projections of trajectories of prices and production and proﬁts
    and such (at best; in reality they do this very badly). But it will never
    lead to an understanding of economics as social relations.

    Sometimes the variables are given to the systems analyst: the species in a
    forest, the network of production and prices, the gizmos in a radio, the
    molecules in an organism. That is, the “system” is presented to us as a
    problem to be solved rather than as an objective entity to be understood.
    But often it is presented more vaguely: how do we understand a rain forest
    or the health of a nation? The way in which a problem is framed, the
    selection of the system and subsystem is prior to systems theory but
    crucial to dialectics. A dialectical approach recognizes that the “system”
    is an intellectual construct designed to elucidate some aspects of reality
    but necessarily ignoring and even distorting others. We ask what the
    consequences would be of different ways of formulating a problem and of
    bounding an object of interest.

2.  Selection of the appropriate mathematical formalisms (equations, graph
    diagrams, random or deterministic models, and so on). While technical
    criteria inﬂuence these choices there are also issues of the purposes of
    the model, the partially conﬂicting goals of precision, generality,
    realism, manageability and understanding. The important thing here is not
    to be limited by the technical traditions of a ﬁeld but to examine all
    these choices not only for hidden assumptions but also for their
    implications.

3.  Interpetation of results. Here qualitative understanding is an important
    supplement to numerical results. In the course of an investigation we may
    go from vague qualitative notions through quantitative explorations to
    more precise qualitative understanding. This is only one example of
    non-progressivist, nonlinear thinking that is captured in our “mysterious"
    negation of the negation.

    Progress is not from qualitative to quantitative. Quantitative description
    of a system is not superior to qualitative understanding. When approaching
    complexity, it is not possible to measure “everything,” plug it all into a
    model and retrieve intelligible results. For one thing, “everything” is
    too big. Qualitative understanding is essential in establishing
    quantitative models. It intrudes into the interpretation of the results.
    The task of mathematics is to make the arcane obvious and even trivial.
    That is, it must educate the intuition so that confronted with a daunting
    complexity we can grasp the crucial features that determine its dynamics,
    know where to look for the features that make it what it is, suspect
    mainstream questions as well as answers.

    A dialectical understanding of process in general looks at the opposing
    forces acting on the state of a system. This is now accepted more or less
    in ordinary scientiﬁc practice. Excitatory and inhibitory neurons,
    sympathetic and parasympathetic stimulation, opposing selection forces or
    an opposition between selective and random processes are all part of the
    tool kit of modern science. However, this has still not been generalized
    to thinking of process as contradiction.

4.  When does the system itself change and invalidate the model? We need a
    permanent awareness of the model as a human intellectual construct that is
    more or less useful within certain bounds and then can become nonsense.
    The internal workings of the variables in a model, the dynamics of the
    model itself or the development of the science eventually reveals all
    models as inaccurate, limited, and misleading. But this does not destroy
    the distinction between models that are terribly wrong from the start and
    those that have relative validity.

5.  Structures doubts. Doubt is an essential part of the search for
    understanding. There are areas of science that have been consolidated to
    the point of near certainty. Others are border regions of our knowledge
    where there is a plurality of insights and opinions and conﬂicting
    evidence. Here doubt and criticism are essential. And beyond that the
    unknown, where we have divergent intuitions and where our biases can roam
    freely. But where we have the same doubts persisting for long periods this
    is not a sign of a postmodern pluralist democracy but of stagnation.
    Useful doubt is not the expression of an esthetic of indecision or a
    response to the petulant reproach of “you're so damn sure of yourselﬂ” or
    an acknowledgement that truth is “relative,” but a historical perspective
    on error, bias, and limitation.

    The art of modeling requires the sensitivity to decide when in the
    development of a science a previously necessary simplification has become
    a gross oversimplification and a brake to further progress. This
    sensitivity depends on an understanding of science as a social process and
    of each moment as an episode in its history, a dialectical sensitivity
    that is not taught in the “objectivist” traditions of mechanistic systems
    analysis.

    Thus systems theory is best understood as reflecting the dual nature of
    science: part of the generic evolution of humanity's understanding of the
    world, and a product of a speciﬁc social structure that supports and
    constrains science and directs it toward the goals of its owners. On the
    one hand it is a “moment” in the investigation of complex systems, the
    place between the formulation of a problem and the interpretation of its
    solution where mathematical modeling can make the obscure obvious. On the
    other hand it is the attempt of a reductionist scientiﬁc tradition to come
    to terms with complexity, non-linearity and change through sophisticated
    mathematical and computational techniques, a groping toward a more
    dialectical understanding that is held back both by its philosophical
    biases and the institutional and economic contexts of its development.

## References

-   Ashby, VV. Ross. 1960. *Design for a Brain*. New York: Wiley.

-   James, H. M., N. Nichols and R. S. Phillips, eds. 1947. *The Theory of
    Servomechanisms*. New York: McGraw-Hill.

-   Levins, Richard. 1966. “The Strategy of Model Building in Population
    Science.” *American Scientist*, 54, 421-431.

-   Maynard Smith, John. 1986. “Molecules Are not Enough" (review of *The
    Dialectical Biologist*, by R. Levins and R. Lewontin). London Review of
    Books, 6 (February).

-   Meadows, Donella H., Dennis L. Meadows, and Jorgen Randers. 1992. *World
    Overshoot*.

-   Ollman, Bertell. 1993. *Dialectical Investigations*. New York: Routledge.

-   O'Neill, R. V., D. L. DeAnge1is,j. B. Waide and T. E. H. Allen. 1986. *A
    Hierarchical Concept of Ecosystems*. Princeton, New Jersey: Princeton
    University Press.

-   Therborn, Goran. 1978. *What Does the Ruling Class Do When it Rules?*
    London: New Left Books.

-   von Bertalanffy, L. 1950. “An Outline of General Systems Theory.” *The
    British Journal for the Philosophy of Science*, 1:2.

[^1]: The term “dialectical materialism” is often associated with the
    particular rigid exposition of it by Stalin and in dogmatic applications
    in Soviet apologetics, while “dialectical" by itself is a respectable
    academic term. At a time when the retreat from materialism has reached
    epidemic proportions it is worthwhile to insist on the unity of
    materialism and dialectics, and to recapture the full vibrancy of this
    approach to understanding and acting on the world. Here I use materialist
    dialectics and dialectical materialism as synonyms.
