% Barbaric Thoughts: On a Revolutionary Critique of Civilization
% Wolfi Landstreicher
% 2004

I am convinced that a revolutionary challenge to the current social order must
necessarily be a challenge to the last ten thousand years of institutional
development that have created it. In short, revolutionary critique must aim at
civilization itself. But what precisely does this mean?

On all sides of the so-called debate over civilization among anarchists,
misunderstanding seems to be the only constant. This is not surprising. These
concepts are difficult, especially in terms of their practical application in
social struggle. In order to gain some clarity, I think that it is necessary
to examine a few questions: What is revolutionary critique? What is
civilization? What does a revolutionary critique of civilization mean in the
realm of ideas? What would a revolutionary critique of civilization mean on a
practical level? Each of these questions opens up thousands of other
questions, especially as one tries to apply them in a revolutionary practice.
But this should only frighten those who have placed their faith in an ideology
and confined themselves within a supposedly “revolutionary” identity. For the
rest of us such questioning should be a fine challenge, a place for putting
ourselves on the line as a stake to be played.

## What is revolutionary critique?

Revolutionary critique is a critique that aims to challenge the present
society at its roots in order to create a rupture with what is and bring about
radical social transformation. What else could “revolutionary” mean? But there
are many implications here.

First of all, revolutionary critique is practical. It seeks a method for
working itself out in the world, for *practically* challenging the present
social order. In other words, it is part of a real struggle against the world
that exists.

For this reason, it also begins from the *present*. A practical, revolutionary
challenge to the present will make use of the past and the future, but will
not be defined by them. Rather they are tools to use in the attack against the
present social order. Revolutionary critique is a practice that strives to
grasp *everything immediately* here and now. It involves an ongoing, incisive
examination of the state, capitalist social relationships, class struggle and
technological development as we encounter them.

Since revolutionary critique aims at a *rupture* with the present order, it
begins with an attack upon all the institutions of this society. It
investigates their fundamental relationships to each other and what these
relationships mean. Thus, it is not so much interested in their excesses or
the ways in which they may contradict the values they proclaim, but in how *at
their best*, even when they live up to their proclaimed values, they fail to
meet the basic needs and desires of human beings. This society is
fundamentally anti-life, anti-human and anti-individual, simply because its
own reproduction requires the subjection of living human individuals to its
needs. Revolutionary critique starts from this realization.

Revolutionary critique also absolutely rejects *moral* critique. This may be
the most important aspect in terms of my argument. Revolution, in practice, is
amoral. Even if at times, in our struggles, a few use the rhetoric of
“justice” and “rights”, our revolutionary battle has nothing to do with
justice or rights or any other value external to us. We want to overturn this
reality not because it is unjust or evil or even “unfree”, but because *we
want our lives back!* Morality belongs to this social order. It has been used
over and over again to keep us in our place — always backed up by the force of
arms. Morality serves well for maintaining what is, because its final word is
always constraint. Since we want to destroy what is, we must also destroy
morality — especially that which exists within us — so that we can attack this
society without constraint.

At the same time, revolutionary critique does not reject principles.[^1]
Rather it helps us to determine a principled manner for acting concretely
against the ruling order in our daily lives. The lack of a revolutionary
critique can lead us to face specific experiences of domination, exploitation
and oppression as isolated incidents, and to seek an immediate solution by any
means necessary. A revolutionary critique can expose the interconnections
between these experiences and show how the “solutions” offered by the
institutions only serve to increase their power over our lives. When we make a
decision to take our lives back in revolt against the social order, we are
choosing a way of encountering the world. It does not make sense for us to use
any means other than those that embody this end of taking back our lives. This
is true on the personal level and on the level of social revolution. Every
time we compromise with power, that part of our life is lost to us. There are
so many aspects of our lives where we are constrained to compromise against
our will. In the areas of struggle, where we have a choice, an anarchist
revolutionary critique will move us to refuse compromise and to maintain our
autonomy.

## What is civilization?

“Civilization” is a confusing word. Early European explorers often strongly
associated what was “good” with civilization. Thus, when they encountered
honest and generous non-civilized people, they would sometimes describe them
as “more civilized” than Europeans. Today, the idea of civilization is
frequently associated with good wine, beautiful human creations and refined
tastes, but in reality the characteristics shared by all civilizations are far
less pleasant: domination, genocide and environmental devastation to name a
few.

Another point of confusion is that many people conceive of “civilization” as a
single entity developing through time. This conception has its source in the
myth of Progress through which modern western civilization, which now
dominates the world, is justified and idealized. This myth assumes that
humanity has developed along a single, fairly straight path that leads to
where we are. In fact, civilizations have arisen in several different places
without connections and without following a single path. Western civilization
is traced back to the “Fertile Crescent”, which is referred to as the “cradle
of civilization”. But Chinese, Japanese, Incan, Mayan and Aztec civilizations,
to name a few, have no connection to this “cradle”. The rise of western
civilization itself has not been a smooth path. Rather it is the crossing,
converging and separating[^2] of several paths, sometimes through trade, far
more often through conflict. Thus, there have been several civilizations
throughout history. A convergence of a number of historical factors allowed
European civilization to carry out a conquest that has now spread across the
globe. But the idea of a single civilization that has developed along a single
path is part of the ideology of Progress, and a revolutionary critique of
civilization must be careful to avoid this trap, because it can easily lead to
a perspective that is simply a reversal of the concept of Progress, rather
than a rejection of this myth. Such a reversal can only lead to a call to
*return* to an imagined beginning which is itself a myth. A revolutionary
critique of civilization needs to reject the mystification inherent in the
idea of Progress, not create a counter-myth based on a moral judgment of
Progress.

Although the idea of a single civilization is false, there are some basic
traits that all civilizations have shared. These can be considered as defining
qualities of civilization. They can provide basic understandings that are
useful in clarifying what a revolutionary critique of civilization might mean.

Civilization comes from the Latin word *civis*, which means city-dweller.
Thus, *civilization* is a way of life based upon city dwelling — upon dwelling
within areas of concentrated human population separated from the areas where
this population gets its sustenance. A revolutionary critique of civilization
would thus want to examine the social relationships that create and are
created by cities.

But the existence of what appears to be a city is not enough, in itself, to
define civilization. So let’s consider what happened when the first
civilizations arose. It is generally agreed that the first civilizations began
to develop about eight to ten thousand years ago. But what actually began to
develop? The evidence we have indicates that certain specializations began to
crystallize into a number of intertwined social institutions: the state,
property, the family, religion, law, work (as an activity separated from
life), etc. This process took place through the alienation of people’s
capacity to create their own lives individually and collectively on their own
terms. This alienated creativity crystallized as concentrated power and wealth
centered in the institutions of society. Based on dispossession of the great
majority, the institutions are the representation of class relationships. With
the rise of this institutional framework, society ceases to be a network of
relationships between individuals for meeting their needs and desires, and
instead becomes a network of predetermined, institutionalized relationships
that stands above people and into which they must fit. Thus, they no longer
consciously develop techniques together for meeting their needs and desires.
Instead *technological systems* are developed with the aim of reproducing
the institutional social order, which is itself a bureaucratic technology for
mediating social relationships. The needs and desires of individuals are
subordinated to this framework, and individuals themselves become cogs in the
social machine. Their survival is made dependent upon this social machine
locking them into an ongoing servitude that can only be broken through a
radical rupture with the social order, a destructive overturning of existing
social relationships, that opens the possibility for creating a new life
together.

When I speak of civilization, I mean this network of institutions that
dominates our lives.

## What is a revolutionary critique of civilization in the realm of ideas?

If civilization is the network of institutions that defines and dominates our
lives, then on a theoretical level, a revolutionary critique of civilization
is an examination of the nature of these institutions. It examines the state,
the economy and the technological systems they develop to control our lives.
It examines the increasing precariousness of our existence on all levels. It
is a class analysis aimed at the destruction of this society, and so its basis
is first and foremost our lives here and now in this world.

Unfortunately, much of what passes for critique of civilization nowadays fails
to be revolutionary, because it chooses a basis other than our own
confrontation with the social reality that is stealing our lives and our own
desire to take back our lives. These other bases may seem to provide a model
for a future non-civilized society or for current activity; or they may seem
to provide a solid moral basis upon which to stand. But in either case, such
bases cannot serve a *revolutionary* critique. Let’s look at some of these
ideas.

From a revolutionary point of view, biocentrism is utterly useless. It is a
moral perspective at its very root. It starts from Life as an abstraction that
stands above us, which we are to serve. Although it is sometimes presented
with a scientific basis (in ecological biology), it is essentially a
metaphysical/moral perspective. Biocentrism is always opposed to
*anthropocentrism*, supposedly “human-centered” thinking. Anthropocentrism is
really just another name for humanism. Humanism is the ideology that starts
from an abstract conception of the Human and places this above us as the ideal
we are to strive to attain. Its practice in the social realm is based on the
concept of rights that society is to protect. In reality, biocentrism does not
challenge humanism at its roots. It simply seeks to expand the moral values of
humanism to include all of Life and not just the Human. Life, not merely the
Human, is the ideal we are to uphold. In the social realm, biocentrism merely
seeks the expansion of rights and protections to the non-human without
challenging the roots of the social order. This is why so many deep ecologists
spend so much time working on litigation and legislation to protect this or
that species or acreage of wilderness. This practice exposes the
non-revolutionary nature of their perspective. In fact, since it rests in a
representational practice (deep ecologist activists represent the Earth and
Life in the courts and legislatures), it is at root a political and reformist
viewpoint. A revolutionary critique of civilization will refuse this ideology
completely.

An environmental perspective can be useful in exposing the harmfulness of the
institutions that control our lives. The technological development necessary
for maintaining social control and the expansion of capital causes extensive
damage. One important aspect of our current precarious existence is the
increasing damage being done to our bodies and our living environments,
raising the question of how much more we can take. But the harmfulness of this
society does not just exist in the various physical toxins we are forced to
ingest. If that were the limit of the problem, it might indeed simply be a
question for the “experts” or one that could be legislated away. The
fundamental harmfulness of this society lies in the social relationships it
imposes. These social relationships make us dependent upon a massive
technological system over which we have no control. And the physical harm of
this system — the poisoning of rivers, the irradiating of food, the spread of
toxic chemicals and engineered genetic material everywhere — is integral to
its existence. Thus, an environmental critique can only become revolutionary
by being part of a total critique of the social relationships that make us
dependent on this toxic mega-machine. It can provide one tool in the
development of that critique, but is not adequate in itself.

I have never called myself a primitivist, because I do not base my critique of
civilization on real or presumed traits of so-called “primitive” societies.
The ideology of a past Golden Age is at best pure speculation. We know very
little about prehistoric human beings and how they lived, and the latest
literature in the field has moved away from some of the more idyllic pictures
popular among pre-historians a couple decades ago. We can read more about
modern so-called “primitive” people in the writings of anthropologists,
ethnologists and various other literate people who have traveled among them.
And certainly this can provide some useful tools for examining civilization
and human possibilities. But it is necessary to recognize that this knowledge
is always speculative, partial and biased, and does not provide a basis for a
revolutionary critique of civilization. Primitivism as an ideology idealizes
the so-called “primitive”. Some contemporary primitivists attempt to sidestep
this limitation by referring to an alleged “primal nature” inherent to all
human beings rather than to previously or presently existing primitive people.
Although they may avoid the accusation of a hypocritical use of science for
their own convenience in this way, they do not escape the problem of basing
their perspective on an external ideal. In fact, these primitivists have
simply revived the humanist ideology with a twist: “primal” human nature
becomes the “real” self we must discover and strive to attain. Being a form of
humanism, this perspective is moral in its essence. It attempts to provide a
basis for revolution without class struggle by replacing this with “primal
war”, but since the latter has its basis in our alleged “primal nature”, and
not in our actual confrontation with the circumstances the present world has
imposed on us, it is simply a moral ideal of how revolution “should” come
about. For Montaigne and Rousseau such idealizations remained a poetic means
for lamenting the evils of civilization, but for some modern primitivists it
becomes a moral ideal, a model for a post-civilization way of life and
sometimes even a concept of what an anti-civilization practice should be here
and now. As such, it is not useful to a revolutionary critique of
civilization. It remains a mere moral critique based upon abstract concepts of
good (primitive) and evil (civilized). Social relationships vanish in this
idealization, and it is easy to get sidetracked into ideas and practices
completely out of touch with the realities we face.

This may be why a few primitivists have gone so far as to reject the very
concept of revolution, preferring to “prepare” for a coming collapse of
civilization by studying “primitive skills” at high-priced schools started for
that purpose. It seems that they imagine this collapse in a way similar to the
visions of the Ghost Dance movement among Native Americans of the late 19^th^
century, where civilized reality is simply pealed away to immediately reveal a
pristine undamaged Wild Nature. Like the survivalists of a decade ago, these
primitivists have given up on the possibility of people taking history into
their own hands in order to destroy the order of domination and radically
transform social relationships. So instead they dream of the apocalypse, after
which a few will be able to live again in the Eden of their imagined
“primitive” world.

In fact, if such a collapse occurred, it would almost certainly involve a
drawn-out process involving massive war on the part of the various rulers of
this world to maintain their power by whatever means necessary and an
unmediated confrontation with the devastation the natural environment has
undergone. I have no desire to “prepare for” such a collapse, seeing it rather
as one of the dismal possibilities this society offers. I would much rather
put the effort into consciously dismantling the social order through
revolutionary endeavors. A conscious revolutionary dismantling of civilization
would involve a conscious confrontation with the realities civilized reality
has created and an exploration of ways to restore truly livable environments.

Of course, the primitivists who openly reject revolution are very few.
Nonetheless, I think that they are the one’s who most consistently follow out
the logic of primitivism. Idealizing what was would consistently lead to
either passive admiration (as in Montaigne and Rousseau) or imitation, but not
a radical and destructive confrontation with what is.

However, there is one very significant lesson we can learn from examining what
is known about non-civilized people. Civilization has shown itself to be a
homogenizing process. This becomes especially clear now that a single
civilization has come to dominate the globe. It could even lead one to believe
in a set human nature. But looking at what we know about non-civilized people,
it becomes clear that there are vast varieties of ways that humans can live in
this world, endless possibilities for relating with oneself, each other and
the surrounding environment. Deterministic speculations have no place here.
Instead, the very real possibilities for revolutionary transformation can be
seen as it becomes clear that the social world we live in has not always been.
But our possibilities will open up in the course of our project here and now,
so the “primitive” cannot be used as a model, simply as one tool among many
for achieving a clearer understanding of the nature of civilization.

One of the areas of theoretical exploration that developed among
anti-civilization anarchists is the exploration of origins. This exploration
certainly opened up many interesting questions. It has also opened the
possibility for a drift into ideology. The first thing we need to keep in mind
while exploring origins is that we cannot find answers. This can only be an
area for speculation and raising questions. Otherwise, it turns into a search
for the “original sin” after which the fall into civilization was inevitable,
and we are on the path of a determinism that requires *redemption* not
revolution.

The exploration of origins was mainly opened by John Zerzan in the 1980’s. It
was an attempt to look into the possible sources of alienation that made the
rise of civilization possible. From the start one of the weaknesses of
Zerzan’s explorations was the lack of a clear explanation of what he meant by
alienation. This lack of clarity infected those anarcho-primitivists who took
Zerzan’s writings as a major theoretical source. I understand alienation as
the separation of our existence from ourselves through a system of social
relationships that steals our capacity to create our lives on our own terms in
order to use our energy to produce and reproduce what is necessary to maintain
separated, centralized wealth and power. What is alien to me is thus that
which I cannot enjoy as my own. Alienation, in this sense, cannot be caused by
an idea or way of thinking. Its source must lie in social relationships. At
times, Zerzan seems to use alienation in this way, but usually he is far more
abstract, speaking of human alienation from nature in a quasi-mystical sense.
And this latter conception seems prevalent in much of the anarcho-primitivist
milieu. It is as if they see nature as a metaphysical entity with which humans
once had an intimate relationship of unity and from which they have become
separated. This is a precise parallel to christian theology, but god has been
replaced with a unified nature. The idea of a “fall” into civilization (a term
Zerzan frequently uses) follows logically from this. It also explains the
frequent claims that we cannot experience unalienated moments in this world —
after all, it is a fallen world. Rather than offering any adequate ideas of
how fallen people in a fallen world could make a revolution to undo the fall,
Zerzan, John Connor and some other primitivists take a strange pleasure in
showing the social disintegration of the modern world as though this, in
itself, was the path to the destruction of civilization. The low point of all
this was Steve Booth’s article “The Irrationalists”. Booth, being unable to go
further along this path, completely gave up any critique of civilization,
choosing instead to become a supporter of the British Green Party. Zerzan
himself resorts to evangelism — talking with journalists from *The New York
Times*, *Spin*, and various other mainstream publications, appearing on Art
Bell’s radio show and on *60 Minutes*, going to “sustainability” and
environmental law conferences to present his message. That Zerzan has utterly
compromised any revolutionary critique with this “practice” is irrelevant
since we all have to compromise in this world. Only in the paradise that will
arise when civilization falls can we escape compromise. Thus, Zerzan’s
revolution can only be understood as *redemption* from a fallen world. But
who or what is the redeemer?

In fact, I think that it may be Zerzan’s theological way of dealing with the
matter of alienation that limits his own capacity to develop his explorations
of origins in useful manner. Though Zerzan opened up important theoretical
areas in calling language, time, symbolic thought, etc. into question, he
failed to take advantage of this. Rather than exploring the nature of
language, time or symbolic thought as social relationships and bringing this
into the present, he came to accept his first declarations as final answers
and began to repeat the same chorus that “this all has to go” and to judge
others in terms of their adherence to what has become his line. And once he
found a saint (and potential redeemer) in the Unabomber,[^3] his ideology
became so entrenched that he could no longer develop his ideas; he could only
preach them.

Of course, attempting to explore origins does take one into treacherous
waters. One has to be able to distinguish a necessary contingency from a
cause. It is true, for example, that the rise of civilization is contingent
upon the existence of language. But this does not mean that language
inevitably leads to civilization. The existence of frontal lobes in the brain
is also necessary to the rise of civilization, but does not cause it. It is
the capacity to distinguish necessary contingencies from causes that allows
one to escape the sort of determinism described above.

It is also easy, in the search for original causes, to reify social
relationships. Zerzan has certainly done this with time, language and symbolic
thought. Declaring them to be the source of our problem involves forgetting
that they originate in social relationships, in real or perceived needs and
desires developing between people. But we cannot know what these were; we can
only speculate, and for some that is not satisfying. What we can do is examine
the social relationships surrounding language, time and symbolic thought now.
Such an examination is particularly interesting as it indicates that capital
and its technological system are, in a certain sense, in the process of
destroying language and time. The destruction of languages worldwide, the
degradation of individual languages and the withering of imagination and with
it the capacity to speak and live poetically are significant aspects of the
reality we face. All of this can be traced to the needs of the ruling order,
its technological development and the domination of the mass media and the
internet over communication. This requires an analysis far more complex than
declarations that language causes alienation. It is quite obvious now that the
*loss of language* does not make us less alienated or less civilized, simply
less capable of communicating with each other and of expressing any desires
outside of the channels permitted by the ruling order.

In the same way, the world of capital, its technology and mass media is
stealing away *our* time. In its stead we are given an eternal present, but
not the edenic one Zerzan imagines. Rather it is the eternal present of
routines repeated day after day that have no direct relationship to our own
needs and desires, but that are required of us to earn the money we need to
continue surviving at the level we’re used to. This is coupled to the media
portrayal of events around the world as unconnected moments without past or
future. The present social order steals away the past as a living reality we
can use in any meaningful way and the future as a place of possibilities and
dreams, leaving us only with an impoverished present of day-to-day
enslavement. Here too a deeper analysis of the current social relationships
are necessary, one that allows us to take back our history and our dreams as
tools to use against this society here and now.

Of course, primitivism itself refers to a past, but it is a mystified past
that stands as an ideal above us, not a concrete past of revolutionary
struggle against the ruling order. Some primitivists dismiss the latter
because those in struggle did not have a conscious critique of civilization.
But dismissal makes a critical encounter with these past struggles impossible.
And a critical encounter with the revolutionary past is too useful a tool to
give up in the battle against this civilized world. Each of these struggles
can be seen as part of an unfinished social war in which knowledge of the aim
and the enemy become gradually clearer, but only if we encounter and wrestle
critically with this past, rather than seeking a mythical past to use as an
ideal. It is particularly important at this time when civilization itself is
creating historical amnesia that we refuse to succumb to it, and that we
continue to grasp revolutionary history as a weapon against the ruling order.

In short, for a revolutionary critique of civilization, the exploration of
origins only has use as the opening up of areas for continual questioning. The
fundamental concepts it calls into question need to be examined in terms of
present-day social relationships, so that we can know where the points of
conflict with the ruling order exist and understand what is at stake.

Another conception that has been used in developing a critique of civilization
is that of “wildness”. I am among those who have made use of this concept in
exploring the meaning of civilization and what a revolution against it might
be like. But there is a danger for the concept of wildness to be tamed — that
is, to be crystallized into a concrete idea of what we *should* be and do.
When I have used the concept of wildness in my critical examinations of the
nature of civilization and the revolt against it, it is precisely because,
unlike the “primitive”, human wildness is an *unknown*. It does not provide
answers or models, but raises questions. Its crystallization into a model
takes the form of equating it with the way of life of human foragers and/or
anthropomorphizing traits of non-human animals (like instincts). The idea of
an inherent “primal” human nature falls precisely into this trap, defining an
ideal, not raising questions of how we can take back our lives as our own.
Defining wildness as a model turns it into a moral value that stands above us
and our daily struggles. In this form it is not useful as a revolutionary
tool. Only as a tension against the civilized reality that is imposed on us,
that is to say only as a perpetual theoretical and practical questioning, can
wildness have use in the development of a revolutionary critique of
civilization.

A revolutionary critique of civilization is a critique of the *social
relationships* of civilization. The rise of civilization is in fact the rise
of the centralization and institutionalization of power and wealth. Starting
with the dispossession of a large number of people — with the stealing away of
their capacity to create their lives on their terms — , relationships of
domination and exploitation, that is to say *class* relationships, are
imposed. With the institution of class relationships, class struggle begins.
At bottom, this is the struggle of the dispossessed to take back their lives
and the struggle of the ruling order to maintain its dominance.

If we begin our critique of civilization from this basis, we can see that the
struggle against civilization is at root a class struggle and an egoist
struggle. Its basis lies not in renunciation, but in the project of
*reappropriation* — of stealing back what has been taken from us. The
mega-machine of the industrial, capitalist state is a juggernaut for which
each of us as individuals is nothing but fodder. The social relationships of
its institutional framework are built into its technological system, making
any vision of self-management of this vast apparatus absurd. So the point is
to destroy it, not for “the Earth” or “Life” or “Wild Nature”, but rather for
ourselves, in order to freely experiment with the innumerable possibilities
for relating and creating our lives without domination of any sort, for
exploring the collective project of individual self-realization. So a
revolutionary critique of civilization will have its basis in a communist and
egoist critique of the existent — in other words, it will be fundamentally
anarchist.

## And how might it work out in practice?

A revolutionary critique of civilization stems from the desire for a world in
which we, *human beings*, can live on our own terms, creating our lives
together as a conscious ongoing project. It has no place for the misanthropy
that is central to much biocentric ideology and sometimes infects
environmental perspectives. Nor does it recognize either primitivist practice
or “rewilding” as panaceas for the harmfulness of civilization. Though
primitive skills may be useful and methods for healing and expanding wild
places are *necessary*, they do not constitute the practical expression of a
revolutionary critique of civilization.

The fact is that we *cannot* go back. North America still has fairly large
regions of wilderness, some of which seems to be humanly livable for very
small numbers. But it could not possibly support the hundreds of millions of
people of this continent. In much of the rest of the world, wilderness has
disappeared or been devastated. In Europe and most of Asia, for example, a
foraging life is not an option for anyone. The road back is closed, and since
the road forward is clearly leading us to increasing domination and disaster,
it is clear we must leave the road and go *elsewhere*.

So a *revolutionary* critique of civilization requires us to leave all known
paths. There are no easy answers or models to follow. From an anarchist
perspective this shouldn’t be seen as a negative thing, since it leaves no
place for leaders or ideological dogmas. In fact, it brings us back to the
present, to our lives and struggles, to the world we face.

So let’s take a look at this world. A single civilization — that of the state
and capital — dominates it. Despite totalitarian tendencies, this domination
is not absolute. Other ways of being and relating exist at its margins and
beneath its vision. Its spread across the globe has forced it to develop
methods of social reproduction and control that are decentralized into a
technological and bureaucratic network. Because control and the relationships
of domination and exploitation are built into this network, it cannot be said
that anyone, even the ruling class, actually controls it. It acts to control
us not only through monitoring our activities, but more importantly by making
us dependent upon it and by determining within very narrow parameters how we
can interact with it. In short, it transforms us into cogs within its
technological framework. This is why talk of seizing the current means of
production for any purpose other than destroying them makes no sense. It is a
means of domination and control, not of creating what we need and desire. The
nodes of this network include computers, surveillance cameras, credit cards,
ID cards and so on. This network seems to be everywhere, but it is stretched
thin, leaving plenty of cracks and making it very fragile. One of the outcomes
of this fragility has been that more and more people are falling through the
cracks, finding themselves with no place within this society. Forced into
poverty, immigration, homelessness and illegality, these undesirables have
little, if anything, to lose in acting against this society. They are a class
of barbarians within the gates of this vast civilized death machine. Even
those who do not fall through the cracks find their existence increasingly
precarious on all levels. If they were to see what they have in common with
those who have fallen through the cracks, this could prove disastrous for the
ruling order. And, of course, there are those who choose to live within the
cracks for the relative invisibility it grants them, allowing them greater
freedom to determine significant aspects of their lives. These people too have
every reason to fight against the megamachine. The masters of this world are
aware of all this and, in recent years, have been practicing fierce
preventative repression in an open manner.

Uprisings and revolutions are not the product of radical ideas,[^4] though
such ideas can certainly play a significant role in the way an uprising
develops — at least, if they are created and expressed in a relevant and
revolutionary manner. But it is our rage over the conditions of existence
imposed on us combined with a complete lack of faith in the capacity and
willingness of either the ruling or oppositional institutions to do anything
to change them to our advantage that can make self-organized revolt flare up
as wildcat strikes, blockades of roads and docks, occupations of spaces,
sabotage, vandalism, riots and insurrections. In these incidents and
activities, we can see the desire to take our lives back directly confronting
this civilization, which steals our lives away, as it exists here and now.
These struggles are direct (if usually unconscious) attacks against the theft
of our lives. This is why they express both class struggle and the struggle
against civilization as we know it.

But then what of the consciously developed revolutionary critique of
civilization? How does it express itself in practice? Each of us encounters
bits of the network of control in our lives every day. Opportunities for
attack are not lacking. So the problem is how to find accomplices, how to
discover the small threads of revolt here and there and figure out how to
weave them together. During the transit worker wildcat strikes in Italy last
December and January (2003–2004), there were comrades pointing out that this
was an opportunity to skip the imposed activities of this society and use the
time instead to explore the possibilities of face-to-face communication and
shared activity. And others sabotaged transit ticket machines. An intertwining
of struggles was at least beginning to express itself. Recently in the United
States, so-called “independent” truckers working at the docks in Oakland and
L.A. had wildcat strikes. Revolutionaries in both cities went to talk with
truckers. Some of the truckers expressed strong anti-war sentiments. Points of
connection certainly existed.

And, of course, there is no need to wait for others to start a struggle. Our
lives have been stolen from us; we have been dispossessed of our capacity to
determine the conditions of our existence, and the enemy and its tools are
everywhere around us. So we can initiate our own struggles. Consider the
surveillance cameras over our heads. Consider the institutional and economic
supports for the war in Iraq — and for wars elsewhere — that surround us.
Consider the research in nanotechnology, with the horrifying possibilities it
opens up for the penetration of social control directly into our bodies, that
is happening right under our noses… The targets are not hard to find.

I have said that a revolutionary critique of civilization is based in class
struggle. But I do not simply mean the struggle of one class against the
other. More essentially, I mean the struggle of the exploited, the
dispossessed, the proletarianized against their condition as such. It is
obviously in the interest of the ruling class to maintain class society, and
thus the entire technological and bureaucratic apparatus through which it
operates. But it is not in our interest to maintain our class position. As
long as we remain exploited, dispossessed, proletarian, we still do not have
our lives. The reappropriation of our lives brings our existence as a class to
an end; this struggle is the collective movement for individual liberation. So
in class struggle the critique of civilization looks for the methods and forms
that carry the destruction of class within them.

Understanding class struggle in this sense gives us a few clues as to its
practical expressions. The specific incidents that provoke struggle will vary
widely and may have lesser immediate aims. But those of us whose activity is
informed by a revolutionary critique of civilization, and thus by a desire to
destroy class relations as such, will only use methods which clearly express
the struggle to take back our lives. Thus, we will refuse representation by
any oppositional organization such as unions or parties, maintaining the
autonomy of our struggle. We will refuse to petition, to negotiate or to
compromise with the rulers of this world. We will choose the methods, times
and places of our actions for ourselves. And we will attack the institutions
and machinery of power that stand in our way. Our accomplices will be those
who choose to share such methods, and our struggles will intertwine with
others for as long as they choose to follow this path, and will separate as
our methods and aims become incompatible.

In addition, since the struggle is to take back our lives and our capacity to
create them collectively on our own terms, it will express itself as a luddite
practice. At the very beginning of the industrial era, the luddites recognized
that the factory system was a technological method for imposing specific
social relationships of exploitation and control, and they attacked it. In the
two hundred years since then, the methodology of the factory — the development
of intertwining, mutually dependent technological systems into which social
control and relationships specific to the needs of capital and the state are
built — has extended over the entire social landscape and our stolen lives are
trapped as dead labor within this apparatus, reproducing its domination over
us. Taking our lives back requires the destruction of the machine, so the play
of Ned Ludd is central to the practical expression of a revolutionary critique
of civilization.

The project of taking back our lives is fundamentally egoist. The fact that
this project needs to become collective if it is to succeed does not change
this. The intertwining of struggles and revolts based on affinity, complicity
and revolutionary solidarity is a fine description of what a union of egoists
might be. And egoism gives us another hint about how a revolutionary critique
of civilization might act in the world (particularly in contrast to a moral
critique). Rejecting all moralistic and deterministic ideology, the egoist
does not look for sources of the original sin of civilization to renounce and
avoid. Instead she raises the question, “What can I take up as my own to use
as a weapon for destroying this society? What can I use as a tool for creating
the life I choose with others against this society?” Social institutions and
the industrial system carry the relationships of domination and exploitation
within themselves. They are useless to the project of taking back our lives.

But it is in the course of struggle against this civilized order that we will
discover what tools and techniques we can take as our own to use for making
our lives. Any anti-civilization critique that tries to define these
possibilities beforehand is a *moral* critique and of little use in
revolutionary transformation. Nonetheless, we can draw conclusions about a
couple traits these tools would have. First of all, the users of the tools
would need to be able to clearly understand on an immediate level the
consequences of their use. Any tool of such complexity that its consequences
remain invisible to the user, having no direct relationship to his reason for
using the tool, would constitute a technological system. The theft of life is
embodied in such a system, because those who use it have no control over the
outcome of their use. Rather they become the victims of consequences beyond
their capacity to foresee. We see the results of this in environmental
devastation and the various epidemics and other threats to health all around
us, as well as in the spread of technologies of social control into every
corner of the earth. Secondly, every technique used would have to be
reversible. If a technique proves to be harmful or dominating, we need to be
able to lay it down immediately and go on about our activities using other
means. This rules out any large-scale technical systems, since they themselves
consist of intertwined, inter-dependent techniques that reinforce each other
and in turn transform us into dependent parts of the machinery as well.

I hope that without presenting a model, I have given some idea of what a
revolutionary critique of civilization might look like as it acts in the
world. Of course, there can be no model for the violent destruction of the
world of domination and the seizing back of our lives that constitute social
revolution. There can only be indications. It is up to us to figure out the
meaning of those indications in our own lives where we are.

## A few final words

I have written this due to my disappointment at the direction much of the
discussion of the critique of civilization has taken. Basing itself in ideals
placed above us, it becomes permeated with dogma and moralizing, with
consequent misunderstanding on all sides. More significantly, these ideals are
of little use to those who are trying to develop a revolutionary critique of
civilization with practical relevance in the daily struggles of the exploited
against their condition. To be revolutionary, a critique of civilization needs
to have such relevance. This means that it will offer no final answers and may
indeed appear to stutter like the barbarian who doesn’t know the language of
the city, that is, of politics. But in practice this refusal of final answers
goes hand-in-hand with the swinging of the iconoclast’s hammer, smashing every
idol and dogma, even those in the temples of anarchy and anti-civilization. It
is my hope that these written explorations prove useful in our ongoing
development of such a critique.

[^1]: In fact, Nechaeyev’s replacement of revolutionary critique with a moral
    idealization of “revolution” led him to reject principles. In the name of
    this highest ideal, anything could be justified. A similar logic created
    the Crusades, the Inquisition and the Reign of Terror.

[^2]: I am thinking here specifically of the definitive separation between
    European and Middle Eastern civilizations that occurred with the breakdown
    of the Roman Empire though I am certain other examples can be found.

[^3]: Now that Ted Kaszinsky has explicitly rejected the idealization of
    primitive people that John Zerzan and his acolytes promote, suddenly he
    has become a misogynist and a homophobe rather than a saint.

[^4]: This is why I have so little patience with evangelistic activities.
